Portland Clean Energy Fund Committee
MEMO: Meeting Agenda Content and Subcommittee Work
To: Portland Clean Energy Fund Committee
From: PCEF Staff
Subject: PCEF Committee full-meeting and subcommittee meeting agenda content and schedule
Date: December 3, 2019
At the November 15th, 2019 meeting the committee expressed a desire to explore different schedules
and methods for gathering information and engaging in meaningful dialogue around PCEF program
development. Staff agreed to present two options for consideration.
The options laid out below are a starting place; the primary goal of the work session portion of today’s
meeting is for the committee to develop and adopt a plan for full and subcommittee meetings for the
next several months. The last two pages of this memo outline the format of the work session.
This inaugural PCEF Committee is in the unique position of doing on-boarding orientation as a group, in
public meetings, and during the start-up stage of the program. As the body responsible for setting
evaluation guidelines and later recommending projects for funding, it is important that members all
have some baseline orientation across each of the funding categories. For this reason, staff recommends
that, at a minimum, the topics listed below be addressed in full-committee meetings. Subcommittee
work can also compliment full-committee meetings through deeper topic exploration and understanding
within each of these, and other, areas.
List of full-committee agenda items included in both proposals:
• Residential Energy Efficiency/Renewable Energy (EE/RE)
• Commercial EE/RE
• Green Infrastructure
• Sustainable Agriculture
• Workforce Development
• Grant Process/Evaluation
Plan A
1. Maintain two full meetings per month schedule for December, January and February to cover
presentations related to funding areas. Committee members with specific area expertise and/or
experience will assist with developing content, agendas, and discussion questions for these
meetings.
December 2019 through February 2020 schedule (full-committee meeting only)
a. December 16th – Residential EE/RE presentation, Commercial EE/RE
b. January I – Transportation, Green Infrastructure, Sustainable Agriculture
c. January II – Workforce Development, report back from subcommittee “c” (see below),
research Justice
12/3/19 Meeting planning memo pg. 1
d. February I - Evaluation and process considerations, Challenges faced by small non-
profits, report back from subcommittees a and b (see below).
e. February II – Draft grant application evaluation metrics and process, and public
input/feedback on draft grant application metrics
2. Subcommittee work:
a. Balance value assigned to carbon reduction and social benefit
b. Requirements for applicants related to: application process, experience and
qualifications, leveraging external funds (match), reporting
c. Workforce development/training
Set regular meeting location at BPS or other consistent location on the eastside. Each
subcommittee can meet up to twice per month; this gives each group the opportunity to
meet at least twice before reporting back to the full group. Meetings will be open to public
and we will post meeting minutes online after the fact. Staff will facilitate, but meeting form
will be more informal discussion. Depending on attendance/discussion, members of the
public may engage in the conversation at the table.
These subcommittees will report back and lead the discussions of evaluation considerations
at the January II and February I meetings.
3. March through May one full-committee meeting per month
a. March – Revised final draft grant application evaluation metrics and process, draft
request for proposals
b. April – Bylaws work session
c. May - Finalize request for proposal
Plan B
Limit full-committee meetings to one per month. As with plan A, funding area presentations will still be
included in full-committee meeting agendas but will be led by the relevant subcommittee. In order to
accommodate one less full committee meeting per month, there will be less discussion time of the
funding area presentations with the whole group.
Subcommittees form around funding areas and develop recommendations around:
• Priority characteristics(e.g. populations served, neighborhoods served, carbon reduction, etc.)
• Gaps in current service delivery that are a priority to be filled
• Balance of value assigned to carbon reduction and social benefit
• Requirements for applicants including: experience and qualifications, leveraging external funds
(match), reporting
December 2019 through May 2020 schedule (full-committee and subcommittees)
December
Subcommittee meetings
• Residential buildings energy efficiency and renewable energy subcommittee
• Commercial buildings energy efficiency and renewable energy subcommittee
• Green infrastructure and sustainable agriculture subcommittee
12/3/19 Meeting planning memo pg. 2
January
Subcommittee meetings
• Workforce development subcommittee
• Transportation subcommittee
• Innovation subcommittee
Full meeting
• Evaluation and process considerations
• Subcommittee led discussion on:
Sustainable agriculture, green infrastructure, residential and commercial EE/RE
o
February
Full meeting
• Research justice
• Grant process and evaluation
• Subcommittee led discussion on:
Workforce development, transportation, and innovation
o
March
Full meeting
• Draft evaluation criteria integrating recommendations from subcommittee work, full committee
input and public comments.
April
Subcommittee meetings
• Bylaws subcommittee
Full meeting
• Final draft of evaluation criteria and draft request for proposals (RFP)
May
Full meeting
• Review revised RFP and finalize
12/3/19 Meeting planning memo pg. 3
Work Session Format – 7:55 to 8:45 pm on December 26, 2019
Subcommittee formation (35 min total)
Parameters:
1. Up to three active subcommittees at any one time
2. Each subcommittee can meet up to two times per month
3. Subcommittees must have at least two committee members
4. Each subcommittee should have a point of contact to coordinate with staff
5. All meetings are open to the public
Goal(s) of work session:
1. Identify and prioritize subcommittees
2. For top near-term subcommittees
a. ID high level goals/purpose of the subcommittee with timeline
b. ID subcommittee point of contact for staff
c. ID frequency of subcommittee meetings in next 2-3 months
Activity:
Set-up: Post it notes with subcommittee ideas on large poster paper (start with list below? May not
want to feed too many)
• Application evaluation - Balancing value assigned to carbon reduction and social benefit
• Requirements for applicants: experience and qualifications, leveraging external funds (match),
reporting
• Workforce development/training
• Funding area buckets
• Capacity building
• Public engagement
Time:
• 2 min: instructions
• 5 min: committee members put up additional ideas for subcommittees
• 3 min: committee members identify top three near term subcommittees using sticky dots
• 10 min: ID subcommittee ideas with highest number of “votes”, discuss ideas not in top three,
finalize top three
• 7 min: committee members write down high level goals/purpose for each of top three selected
subcommittees
• 3 min: move into three groups based on ability/interest in serving on subcommittee
• 5 min: individual groups discuss frequency of meetings and select point of contact for staff
12/3/19 Meeting planning memo pg. 4
Committee agenda development (15 min total)
Goal(s) of work session:
1. Prioritize full-committee meeting agenda topics for January through May
2. Identify committee members interest in assisting in agenda development and helping lead
discussion around specific topics
3. Determine the number of full-committee meetings needed for January through May
This inaugural committee is in the unique position of doing on-boarding in public meetings and during
the start-up stage of the program. It is important, as the body responsible for setting evaluation
guidelines and recommending projects for funding, that members have some baseline orientation in
each of the funding categories.
List of full committee agenda items (start with list below)
• Residential EE/RE
• Commercial EE/RE
• Green Infrastructure
• Sustainable Agriculture
• Workforce Development
• Grant Process/Evaluation
Time:
• 3 min: committee members offer additional items
• 8 min: prioritize items by importance and by order in which they should appear on agendas.
Time allocated to each topic will be determined by the committee member co-chair and
o
staff (see next bullet)
• 2 min: committee member volunteers to co-chair a topic, duties can include assisting with
agenda development and helping to lead committee meeting discussion
• 2 min: set number of full-committee meetings for January through May
Given the subcommittees that have been identified as well as the topics to be covered
o
in the full-committee meetings; how often should the committee plan to meet in the
next several months?
12/3/19 Meeting planning memo pg. 5