`
Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) Grants Committee
1/14/20 MEETING MINUTES
Committee Members present: Jeff Moreland Jr., Maria Sipin, Megan Horst, Michael Edden Hill, Ranfis Villatoro, Robin
Wang, Shanice Brittany Clarke, Faith Graham
Committee Members not present: Andrea Hamberg
Portland Clean Energy Fund staff present: Sam Baraso, Cady Lister, June Reyes, Janet Hammer, Jaimes Valdez
MEETING DECISIONS/ACTION ITEMS
• December 16, 2019 Meeting Minutes. Committee accepted 12/16/19 meeting minutes.
OUTSTANDING REQUESTS
• Staff presentation of plan to address need for input from indigenous community
MEETING SUMMARY NOTES
A) Public meeting called to order.
• Opening inspiration: Megan Horst – reading of indigenous perspective and history of David G. Lewis, tribal
ethnohistorian.
• No public signed-up for public comment, none from phone
• Minutes approved with no edits or comments.
B) Regenerative Agriculture Presentations and Discussion
Regenerative Agriculture 101 - Megan Horst provided an overview of food systems including industrial food, sustainable
food systems planning, and indigenous land/resource management perspectives. The presentation addressed history of
dispossession of indigenous land, and exclusion of black land ownership in Oregon during settlement and homestead era
that led to current inequities in access to farmland, as well as disparities of hunger injustice and access to food. The
overview covered carbon emissions in the food system at a local, country and global level, noting that food emissions
are complex to measure due to lack of transparency in all components of production. PCEF grants can fund regenerative
agriculture, the code focuses on practices which reduce carbon. Dr. Horst provided definition and examples of
regenerative agricultural practices. Measurement of carbon in soil is an evolving science but there are methods in
practice. Overview of the economics and examples of Portland food systems show that of $4.8 Billion total, only 1.5
percent is spent on locally sourced foods. Summary of challenges and barriers. Presentation is available online in
1/14/20 meeting material.
Regenerative Agriculture Perspectives Panel
• Rob Cato and Colleen Dixon from Zenger Farms provided an overview of Zenger farm work and history. Zenger is
a 20-year old ~20 acres farm in east Portland. Provides hands-on learning opportunities, food justice, education
and serves as a working organic farm. Hosts CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) program (Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program, SNAP, eligible), youth education programs, community-based food education and
culturally specific cooking workshops. Recommendations to PCEF: Already a lot of awareness of food systems in
1.14.20 PCEF Committee Mtg Minutes page 1
Portland, connect with stronger equity work. Recognize work that is already being done. Challenges: There is a
need to work with each other have greater collaboration, lack of time is a challenge.
• Growing Gardens (GG), Jason Skipton. GG has been working for 25 years and is best known for providing home
gardens in backyard of low-income families. Hires “food citizens” to work in their own neighborhood, and has
partnership with 10 elementary schools, providing STEM education. “Let us grow Program” serves 16 corrections
institutions throughout OR with farming opportunities. Minimum 3-year support and mentorship model for
backyard gardens. Recommendations to PCEF: Support work that is happening on the ground. Support staff and
job creation, not just new programs/projects.
• Shantae Johnson from Mudbone Grown shared the organization’s story as a Black-owned small farm – selling to
direct markets and institutions. Provides food system consultation, operates three agriculture training food
programs, focused on black, POC, and veterans. Working with a lot of other grassroots efforts. Committed to a
more resilient and just food community. Recommendations to PCEF: Focus on capacity building first to build for
the long term, fund land acquisition to build intergenerational wealth. Need funds for site development and
labor costs.
Questions from Committee:
- Robin: With population in US and OR, how do we move from industrial to regenerative system?
Rob: Build and keep existing local food production, increase access to land and peoples home spaces.
o
Shante: Cooperative economics one way to scale up, Black Food Sovereignty is workin on new models.
o
Jason: Some people from other cultures in Portland have deep experience already and have solutions.
o
Elevate that knowledge from local leaders. There is opportunity to show what’s possible on multiple
levels of food system.
Colleen: Support institutional demand to grow a stable market, e.g. schools using more local food. Allow
o
CSA subscriptions to be paid from FSAs (Flexible Spending Accounts) as medical prescription/expense.
Institutionalize access to local food and provide more stability for farmers.
Megan: Producing enough food is not the problem, the world overproduces food. The issue of creating
o
access to food for all people is one of distribution and anti-poverty approaches.
- Ranfis: Importance of collaboration and need to define what “institutionalizing” looks like. Please clarify?
Shante: In reference to institutional markets: there should not be guidelines on what markets should be
o
served but focus on collaboration and community benefit. Look at projects led by black, indigenous, POC
folks, and the history of exclusion from land, specifically in agriculture. OR is a huge agricultural state –
funding should focus on access for people who have been excluded.
Rob: There is interest in farming but need to build stronger network models.
o
Jason: Collaboration is a big opportunity, there are a lot of good models that can scale up.
o
- Michael: What is experience and challenges in acquiring land? How much is being used?
Shante: Currently on 19 acres in Corbett, 2.5 acres in partnership with OR food bank. Supporting POC
o
farmers with seeds, mentorship, etc. Access to land is sometimes temporary, often only for a few
seasons. Need for stability, urban farms are often displaced every few years. In urban environment,
there is limited green space and competing needs.
Jason S: Barriers are gentrification and land use changes, access to water, contaminated soils.
o
- Shanice – Portland has a lot of local leaders interested in collaborative/cooperative economics. Land acquisition
and capacity should be prioritized. Would like to know more about coop economics, and what works and
doesn’t work?
Shante- Opportunity to build on work already happening in co-op economics to share resources. Black
o
Food Sovereignty Coalition is working on strategic planning for co-ops. Recommendation: Start with
funding multiple year strategic planning in agriculture, to identify collaboration opportunities.
Coleen: Also continue to fund what is already happening, so that innovation can grow. Don’t focus just
o
on NEW collaborations, support existing work too.
- Maria S: Reflection on themes around identifying what is impactful and local. Want to focus on black, indigenous
and POC needs, and value the input, stories and data to help inform this work.
C) Green Infrastructure Presentations and Discussion
1.14.20 PCEF Committee Mtg Minutes page 2
• Bureau of Environmental Services (BES): Jennifer Karps, BES, Provided an overview of green infrastructure and
the work of the Bureau of Environmental Services in Portland. Definition of green infrastructure: things that are
nature or act like nature within the construct of the built environment that we live in. Things like ecoroofs,
naturescaping, street trees, green street facilities (i.e., bioswales). These installations require labor intensive
maintenance which is a hallmark of green infrastructure, whereas grey infrastructure is hidden and while it must
be taken care of, not in the same way. Green infrastructure helps the Bureau meet many goals: climate change
adaptation/resiliency, neighborhood health, hydrology, aquatic species.
Questions from Committee:
- Ranfis: Curious if most of the work was done in-house or contracted? Question about the workforce, particularly
equity considerations.
Jennifer K: Some of the work involves volunteers, Green Street Stewards are empowered to take care of
o
green street facilities. The engineering and installation of green street facilities is contracted out, but
cannot speak to equity implications because its not in scope of her work. Colleague recently reported
contracted work where MWESB participation is 43 percent, which is very high. All trees are planted
through three contracts, most through Friends of Trees. Most of the services must be offered in
underserved neighborhoods, with money set in the contract for equity-oriented organizations.
• Portland Parks and Recreation (PPR): Jenn Cairo, City Forester, provided an overview of Portland Parks and
Recreation by the numbers. Summary of urban forest services and benefits. Parks goal that each resident live
within ½ mile of a park or natural area; there is a clear disparity in access City-wide vs. East Portland in maps.
• 15 percent of property in the City owned and managed by PPR. This includes 57 community gardens with
over 1000 plots.
• Urban forestry is responsible for tree regulation in the park, along streets, and on private property. Noted
disparity in tree cover on both the west and east side of the Willamette River. Even without Forest Park,
west of the Willamette River has 44 percent tree canopy cover vs. 21 percent east of the Willamette River.
Work a lot with volunteers in implementing projects, with over 65,000 volunteer hours, collaboration is
essential. Like many natural resource fields, urban forestry is largely white and male, and working with
community orgs to get more people of color into professional arborist careers.
• Noted that PCEF could work on supporting and creating capacity for local organizations in forest stewardship
and tree planting initiatives. A PPR study indicated a desire for the City to manage street trees. Under
current city policy, adjacent land owner is required to manage trees on City property in the right of way
adjacent to one’s property. Many major cities maintain street trees: San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago,
Salem, Eugene etc. Maintenance is something that could create new jobs and opportunities for a more
diverse workforce.
• Voz Worker’s Rights Education Project: Osmani Alcaraz Ochoa provided a background on Voz. The creation of
the organization is a story of survival and collective resistance by day laborers. In 1998, day laborer project
through Workers Organizing Committee was formed to stop immigration raids and wage theft. In 2000, grew
into Voz Workers Rights in response to community building and defense of rights. It is the only day laborer
center in the state of Oregon. Largely immigrant, Latino, black and African-American. Location provides a safe
dignified place for day laborers. Help day laborers get matched, provide safety materials, know their rights and
negotiate fair wages.
Mo Taylor, from the Voz Workers Center provided more context of recent history. In 2018 began focusing on
green workforce development with the aim to increase economic opportunity and focus on environmental
justice and leadership development. Voz desires to increase support to advance skills within the day laborer
community. Numerous onsite projects in partnership with BES, Verde, Parks, Outgrowing Hunger, etc. have been
critical in developing hands-on skills with day laborers.
1.14.20 PCEF Committee Mtg Minutes page 3
Recommendations and needs:
• Incentives to participation through stipends. Training results in in-house certification.
• Support to invest in creating a permanent local hub.
Consideration of things the committee should be aware of:
• Do not consider 1-year restricted costs, consider funding operating costs.
• Prioritize funding organizations led by and staffed by POC.
• Do not make the application burdensome, a process should take less than three hours.
• PCEF should avoid advancing existing inequities in the funding world.
• Asian Pacific American Network of Oregon (APANO): Todd Struble and Maiyee Yuan provided an overview of
project in the Jade District. Have been working in area around SE 82nd and Division for 5-6 years now. Highly
diverse community and low-income. Area faces environmental impacts like urban heat island, transportation-
related air pollution. Described a process convened by Oregon Solutions as a result of a Governor declaration,
which subsequently resulted in application for an EPA design and visioning grant to support addressing
environmental issues in the neighborhood. Recently received a grant with Friends of Trees, and Willamette
Partnership from Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to evaluate impact of tree plantings. Described the
Greening the Jade Project and elements of design that have been envisioned and workshopped with community
members, including elements of green infrastructure, street design, and buildings.
Recommendations for PCEF:
• Echo all the elements raised by Voz
• Specific things: affordable commercial development, e.g., Portland Mercado
• Energy efficiency for the Jade District
• Solar workforce development
Questions from committee:
- Robin: The word green was used a lot in the presentations. What is the scope that we should be considering and
comparing related to project areas?
Sam: The legislation directs us to be in service of Climate Action Plan, and a combination of carbon
o
benefits and community benefits. There are also potential co-benefits that need to be quantified
through criteria framework.
Jen Cairo: There is a need to consider all aspects of what is relevant for climate and equity crisis.
o
- Ranfis: Request that presenters and staff share challenges about workforce development and disparities
recognizing that we’ve struggled as a region with this. Also want to hear more from community groups about
challenges in making and moving these projects, especially in working with agencies, contractors, financial
institutions, etc.
Todd : Challenges working with bureau partners. Folks in the same bureau knowing what they are all
o
working on. Benefit of Oregon Solutions process was having all the bureaus in the same room working
together. Once deliverables are met, then how do you sustain momentum and continue to have people
engaged.
Maiyee: Always thinking about community control and community development. Parks has been great,
o
but how do we both mobilize landowners and also have enough resources to acquire land. Create
process for community based-development to happen.
- Faith: Anti-displacement came up in APANO’s presentation. What came up in community conversations about
how improvements would not lead to further displacement?
Todd: It’s not only about greening but housing and rent stabilization. APANO has approached, and
o
community has affirmed, that mixed-use of space that addresses multiple challenges is desired. Critical
1.14.20 PCEF Committee Mtg Minutes page 4
to help local small businesses stay in affordable spaces. Those policies are extremely vital when talking
about green zoning, or green displacement.
- Michael: You mentioned taking care of trees on public space, arborists, etc. Arborists seem to be a very
homogenous group. Fear a tree maintenance program would result in a predominantly white-male arborist
workforce working on tree canopy on the west side. How could those effects be mitigated?
Jenn C: Intentional work based on an equity lens to urban forestry’s resource allocation with increased
o
focus on underserved areas in partnership with culturally specific organizations. For example, currently
focused on Hazelwood community and targeted partnerships.
- Shanice: Want to double down on working with community-centered institutions in leading efforts. Have folks
interacted with community benefit agreements to drive project investments? Reflecting to address the
structures and forms of grants that are most helpful?
Todd: It is challenge of working with bureau’s- it’s about having comprehensive approach to addressing
o
issues. For example, Prosper Portland should be as invested in green infrastructure, housing and
transportation, in the same way that transportation is invested in economic prosperity.
Thanks and closing of meeting – public welcome to stay during work session.
Work Session
D) Work session- Purpose : Early guidance to potential grant applicants
• Exercise: 24 questions, compiled from outreach events, were sorted by committee members into the following
categories:
Green = little deliberation needed, can answer in the affirmative fairly easily;
o
Yellow = some deliberation needed and questions remain; and
o
Red = a lot of deliberation needed and questions remain.
o
Additionally, questions were sorted by degree of certainty of the category.
o
Staff will use the feedback provided in this work session to inform communication with potential
o
applicants and in framing the conversation around development of the summer 2020 request for
proposal.
There was general consensus at a high level that PCEF grants should allow for funding of staff positions,
o
equipment purchase and overhead costs, and that PCEF grants should allow for multi-year projects.
Committee member closing comments
E) No Committee member closing comments
Meeting adjourned at 9:00pm.
1.14.20 PCEF Committee Mtg Minutes page 5