Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) Grants Committee
April 9th, 2020, 7:00 p.m. – 9:00 p.m.
Meeting Minutes
Committee Members present: Andrea Hamberg, Jeff Moreland Jr., Maria Sipin, Megan Horst, Michael Edden
Hill, Ranfis Villatoro, Robin Wang, Shanice Brittany Clarke, Faith Graham
Committee Members not present: none
PCEF staff present: Sam Baraso, Cady Lister, Jaimes Valdez, Janet Hammer, June Reyes
Meeting Decisions / Action Items
• March 31, 2020 Meeting Minutes. Committee accepted 3/31/20 meeting minutes.
MEETING SUMMARY NOTES –
Public Meeting called to order.
• Committee member, staff, and public attendees were invited to introduce themselves.
• Sam Baraso, PCEF Program Manager, invited Commissioner JoAnn Hardesty to address the PCEF
Committee.
• Commissioner Hardesty expressed Portland City Council’s steadfastness in the mission of PCEF and
assured the Committee that there is no proposal from City Council to stop, reform, change, or divert
PCEF dollars from its mission. However, Commissioner Hardesty noted there will be a slowdown of the
collection of taxes. Commissioner Hardesty noted City Council’s commitment to the spirit, vision, and
expectations of PCEF grants that are led by frontline communities including Black, Indigenous, and other
people of color and that the program is vital for economic recovery. The floor was opened up for
questions and comments from the Committee:
Faith Graham, Committee member: What does the delay in collecting taxes look like for the first
o
deployment of PCEF dollars?
 Commissioner Hardesty: It will have no impact on the first deployment of dollars.
Ranfis Villatoro, Committee member: Thanked the Commissioner and echoed back the
o
importance of PCEF in rebuilding and as a key economic engine to help revitalize the economy.
• Commissioner Hardesty closed by expressing that Council is depending on the Committee to be a critical
eye as they have the responsibility for reviewing applications and that when this crisis is over, she is
looking forward to building a community that centers frontline communities and actually makes sure
people with the least access and resources benefit from our investments.
• Sam read a joint statement from Mayor Wheeler and Commissioner Hardesty that expressed full
support from their offices in moving PCEF’s work forward (see attachment for full statement).
• Cady Lister, PCEF Staff, asked Committee members for any changes to the March 31, 2020 meeting
minutes. Committee members requested no changes and approved the meeting minutes
Public comment.
• Cady invited three members who signed up for public comment to address the Committee:
John Moore, Frog Ferry System participant and volunteer, expressed that the connection
o
between transportation, air quality and good health is important. John noted that the state has
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 1
been divided on how to address this issue and that business have not made the connection for
years and if they do, we would see big improvements.
Anissa Pemberton, Coalition of Communities of Color, stated that during the public health and
o
economic crisis, it’s more pressing than ever that PCEF grantmaking is launched in an equitable
and transparent way. They noted that the PCEF coalition supports the draft guiding principles
and are proud to say they align closely with their original campaign. Anissa ended by offering
the PCEF coalition’s willingness to help with the recruitment of the new grant committee
member.
Greg Harr, Solar for All, stated they’re a small local non-profit providing funding for installing
o
solar panels on low income homes. Greg explained that due to COVID-19, they decided to
provide the down payments early on five installation projects to provide their installers with
income during this time because so many jobs were being cancelled or delayed due to the virus.
These projects were being planned for a PCEF grant application. Greg noted that usually there’s
a requirement for requests for funds to happen before any project activity starts and was
wondering if the Committee would consider funding expenditures that occurred before grant
applications have opened up.
• Public comment received after this meeting is documented in the attachments.
Draft guiding principles – public input report.
• June Reyes, PCEF Staff, summarized the process and main elements of the comments and feedback on
the guiding principles. June noted that the public comment period coincided with the onset of COVID-
19, which required adapting outreach including extending the comment period by two weeks. She noted
that though the public comment survey was translated into Spanish, Vietnamese, and Russian, all
responses came back in English and there is a need to improve our program’s reach to these speakers. A
total of 210 members of the public provided feedback; 130 people answered the online survey and 80
sent comment via email.
• June summarized comments for each principle noting that overall there was strong support for all
principles. For each principle, there is also a summary callout of responses from priority populations
identified in the City Code. Results summarized are summarized below, additional detail can be found in
the summary of public comment memo:
Justice Driven: Most respondents appreciated focus on Black and Indigenous people, however,
o
some commenters asked if additional callouts should be made for other ethnic/racial identities,
and how indigenous is defined.
Accountable: This principle had the highest level of agreement. Some questions about what this
o
might look like in action.
Community-powered: Some commenters flagged the section about honoring existing
o
partnerships, not wanting to minimize the value of new partnerships.
Focused on local co-benefits: Some commenters noted the mention of resilience in this principle
o
feels particularly important given COVID crisis. There were some questions about what co-
benefits meant and how the concepts in this principle link to anti-displacement.
Discuss and finalize guiding principles.
Committee members were invited to ask questions and comment on the guiding principles:
• Robin Wang, Committee member: In responses, there were one or two comments that had some
disagreement with each principle, is this the same person or does that vary across the board?
June: This was the same person throughout and they did not provide additional comments to
o
explain ratings.
• Robin: Were there comments that surfaced up repeatedly that really warrant conversation?
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 2
June: Top three would be providing rationale for Black and Indigenous focus and defining what
o
we mean by Indigenous, whether or not there should be a specific callout for climate impact /
carbon reduction goals, and how displacement links to co-benefits.
• Shanice Clarke, Committee member: Are the priorities that have been elevated to the top also reflective
of the core group of priorities for women and people of color?
June: Priority populations mostly had questions about how Black and Indigenous people would
o
be centered and whether or not the focus should be expanded to include women of color and
immigrants as well as what co-benefits meant and displacement. Did not hear much about
defining climate impacts and carbon reductions, but did hear that it was important to connect
the dots between climate and sectors such as housing and transportation.
Shanice: Helpful to hear especially as we try to define climate justice and how to relate that to
o
transportation and racial justice.
• Andrea Hamberg, Committee member: When workshopping this language at past Committee meetings
and agreeing on specific language around the focus on Black and Indigenous people, we talked about
committing to explaining to the community what that means to the Committee and for the program.
• Committee members discussed how to get to a final proposal noting that the vast majority of responses
were very supportive so it likely requires a polishing of the language but no substantive changes.
• To get to a final proposal on the guiding principle language for Committee members to vote on for the
April 23rd meeting, June will reach out to Committee members individually on polishing the language.
Committee member recruitment plan.
• Sam noted that the Committee Member Recruitment Plan memo outlines the plan to recruit and seat a
committee member who bring an Indigenous voice. The memo was sent to the Committee earlier this
week so they could consider, discuss, and adopt. Sam provided an overview of the timeline: Committee
member application would be up by Monday, April 13th and it would be open for three weeks upon
which we would check in with the Committee and see how many applications were received. If there are
at least 15 applications, we would close the recruitment, but if not, the recruitment would be extended.
• Sam then requested at least two PCEF Committee members to sit on the recruitment subcommittee
along with the City’s Tribal Liaison, Laura John. The subcommittee would review and evaluate
applications with the expectation of bringing those to the Committee in May and advancing a
recommendation to City Council in June or July.
• Committee members were invited to ask questions and provide comments:
Andrea: How are conflicts of interests going to be handled?
o
 Sam: There have been a lot of lessons learned since original recruitment and several
steps have been taken to make requirements clearer.
• MOTION: Michael Eden Hill, Committee member, proposed to move forward with the Committee
Member Recruitment Plan as put forward by the PCEF staff, making sure that it includes the conflict of
interest questions and notes on the importance of zero conflicts of interest.
Shanice Clarke seconded that motion.
o
Committee members: Andrea, Faith, Jeff, Maria, Ranfis, Megan, and Robin supported the
o
motion.
• Three Committee members volunteered to be part of the recruitment subcommittee: Maria Sipin,
Megan Horst, Michael Eden Hill.
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 3
Capacity building update.
• Jaimes Valdez, PCEF staff, provided an update on the capacity building and outreach activities as
organizations get ready to apply for funds. Jaimes described the elements of capacity building resources
that are being considered:
Webinar trainings and workshops on different topics related to getting ready to apply for funds.
o
Topics include: grant writing, financing projects and leveraging resources, account and grant
administration, legal, insurance, and risk management, and marketing and communications.
Additional resources and financial support for organizations including participation in trainings
o
and workshops, necessary technology, application preparation, and up to 10 hours of one-on-
one capacity building or project development consultation. These resources would be targeted
at smaller organizations that serve frontline communities.
Cohort development and trainings, which would be a way to do expand outreach and build
o
leadership and capacity of a cohort of organizations. This outreach would be targeted at smaller,
frontline serving organizations or where gaps currently exist in serving priority populations of
PCEF.
Capacity building through planning or mini-grants that provide the opportunity for entities and
o
organizations to develop and build proposals for long-term projects.
• Jaimes noted that the near-term webinars and trainings are focused on subjects that are needed more
immediately to help organizations apply and this will be contracted through on-call training contracts. In
the future, there will be a larger breadth of trainings offered and contracted through a competitive RFP
process.
• Jaimes closed his presentation by sharing more about the “Organizational Capacity Resource
Workgroup” that is being convened by PCEF staff. The workgroup will provide input to PCEF staff
regarding community organization’s needs for training and capacity building opportunities. The next
meeting will be April 17th and the group will meet two times a month. The workgroup is open to any
organization to participate and prioritizes frontline organization perspectives.
• Committee members were invited to ask questions and comment:
Robin: Is the funding for this effort separate from grant funding and if so, where is it coming
o
from? Also, what is the selection process?
 Jaimes: Funding comes from the administrative bucket of resources not from grant
funds. Criteria will be developed that aligns with the goals of PCEF and the details are
still being worked on.
Megan: Appreciated thoughtful development and interested in hearing about the cohort
o
development as it moves forward.
Application review process.
• Cady explained that primary objective tonight would be addressing issues raised by the Committee
regarding the application review process and getting to a point where we can approve the framework
for this process. She added that some issues will require more discussion such as a comment Michael
had made about one of the eligibility criteria being that state licensed workers get prevailing wage, but
generally, these issues do not need to be resolved in order to move forward with the review process
framework. Cady turned it over to Ranfis who is part of the grant process subcommittee to explain the
updated proposal for the review process, which incorporates Committee member comments.
• Ranfis reviewed the application review process proposal for small and large grants noting that the
documentation and other details required within each of the steps will be different depending on
whether it’s a small or large grant. The elements, which would be scaled for each, would include an
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 4
eligibility screening, substantive review, and the Committee funding recommendations including
portfolio balancing.
• In regards to the small and large grants process, Cady clarified that details on what the screening and
threshold review are under consideration and we are looking for feedback on those details.
• Ranfis explained the mini grants review process and that the purpose of these grants are to be
responsive to needs so that funds can be distributed in an urgent and timely way. Committee members
would define scoring criteria and allow staff to make decisions. Staff would bring a package of
recommendations to the Committee at defined time intervals.
• Ranfis then explained recommendations for the year one process including: having a single solicitation;
allow for online, email, and snail mail applications and no video submissions; have a scoring panel of
about 4 to 6 members with at least 2 PCEF Committee members and at least 2 staff, and the potential to
bring subject matter experts; Committee member scoring panel participation; minimum score to be
established to pass technical review and minimum score for equity criteria; and portfolio balancing
criteria.
• Cady explained the final slide of the presentation, which provides ideas for the definitions of the sizes of
grants and the duration of how long you might have to spend those funds.
• The Committee was invited to ask questions and comment:
Michael: What is the reasoning for the $5,000 mini grant requirement?
o
 Sam: City procurement rules require any grant funds that are over $5,000 to go to City
Council. There are still some legal questions to confirm around this.
Ranfis asked Michael to clarify a concern brought up at the last meeting around how much each
o
Committee member should review.
 Michael explained that the root issue is understanding what the workload is and the
duration to complete.
 Faith asked Michael to elaborate more on the concern asking if it seems unfair to the
applicant pool that voices aren’t represented equally from the Committee in the review
process.
 Michael responded that it’s both about fairness of workload and acknowledging that
folks on the Committee are representative of communities and those communities
wouldn’t be heard if Committee member review was uneven.
• Cady closed the meeting and asked Committee members to review the process and be prepared to
provide direction and approval for the subcommittee to move forward.
Meeting adjourned at 9 p.m.
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 5
ATTACHMENT 1:
City Council Statement
“We want to thank you all for the hard work you are doing, particularly in these uncertain times.
As you all continue your work on the Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund, you are no doubt
thinking about your role and the role of PCEF in the public health and economic crisis we are currently
facing. Your work is important now more than ever. PCEF was designed to address the same underlying
inequalities that are exacerbated by the current crisis, and will play a critical role in supporting
community response and economic recovery in an equitable, climate-friendly way. So it is critical that
you continue to implement the Portland Clean Energy Fund as designed. The climate crisis exists in
parallel with the current COVID-19 crisis, not apart from it.
That said, we recognize you all may be concerned about the immediate needs of folks we intend to help
through the first set of PCEF investments. Know that the City is working hard to support those most in
need across our community. The City expects to directly receive at least $100 million through the
Federal CARES Act and will look to these resources to support our community. It is also important to
note that the CARES Act is focused on response during these three months of the health crisis while we
are social distancing; it does not address the re-opening or recovery periods. And for this reason
amongst many others, PCEF will be instrumental. Not only in providing critical resources during the
recovery, but also in building community resilience over the long term and demonstrating a new model
for making climate investments centered on equity.
So we want you all to know that you have the full support of both of our offices in moving PCEF’s
important work forward, and City Council looks forward to receiving your funding recommendations
later this year. We also want you to know that staff consistently praise this Committee and the
compassion you all bring to the work. Thank you for all that you are doing.”
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 6
ATTACHMENT 2:
Comments from Post-PCEF Committee meeting survey
Are there any comments you'd like to share about the ideas that were discussed in the Committee
meeting?
Very interested to hear about the framework for grant reviews, and grant funding levels.
These PCEF gatherings allow me as an advocate for living wages and good benefits in the electrical
industry to better understand the process and the vision of PCEF. Also gives me an opportunity to
engage signatory electrical contractors that are interested in helping out struggling local communities
and being a part of a greener future and economy.
Overall, a concern that the scale of grants is much too small (thinking about <$100K as small and
>$100K as large) given the enormity of the need, the need to have programs that are large enough to
be efficient, and given your future need to deploy $40-$60 Million per year! Similarly, seems the
capacity building/development grants and mini-grants at $5K seem too small. Given legal limits of
$5K, may need way for orgs to clearly articulate multiple different needs, and allow for 2 or 3 or 4
such grants per org per year.
PCEF Meeting Minutes 4/9/2020 page 7