PCEF Grant Committee
Meeting
August 4, 2022, 6 p.m. – 8 p.m.
VISIT US ONLINE
portland.gov/bps/cleanenergy
Virtual Participation Check
Guidelines for public participation
Guidelines applied to virtual meeting:
• Committee meetings
• Committee meetings
open to the public
open to the public
Chatbox: open for introductions. All other times,
• Public invited to
host-only chats (PCEF Staff).
comment at around
• Individual proposals
6:10 p.m.
will not be discussed in Raise Hand: used by Committee only.
• Public invited to
this meeting
participate in
Video: on for Committee only.
conversation during
• Obrpepaok rattu n7i:0ti0e sp f.omr. Must
pjouinb lvicia e Znogoagme mtoe nt in Microphone: public members muted.
opathrteirc ifpoartuem. s/meetings
Recording: this meeting is being recorded.
Captioning: this meeting is being captioned;
settings > show subtitles.
Opening inspiration
Introductions
Agenda
6:00 Introductions
6:10 Public comment
6:20 Program updates
6:30 Audit follow-up updates, structural change timeline, and RFP #3 timeline
6:55 Break
7:00 Committee and public breakout
7:15 Audit follow-up updates, structural change timeline, and RFP #3 timeline (cont’d)
7:50 Committee member closing comments
8:00 Meeting close
Public comment
Program updates
• Heat response program
• Committee member and staff recruitment
• Hybrid meetings, meeting frequency, small-group briefings
Audit follow-up updates, structural change
timeline, and RFP #3 timeline
RFP #2 lessons, audit follow-up, structural change, RFP
#3 planning
• RFP #2 lessons
• Audit response commitments:
• Define performance metrics (July 2022), goals (July 2023)
• PCEF relevant alignment with climate goals (December 2022)
• Provide clarity on admin vs. other costs (December 2022)
• Continue to assess the Committee’s governance structure (July 2023)
• Program updates and structural changes
• RFP #3 planning
• Incorporating RFP #2 lessons
• RFP specific goals?
Program updates and structural improvements
Four goals:
Goal #1:
Identify changes to enable accelerated funding of carbon reduction projects in
alignment with ballot measure 26-201
Goal #2:
Draw clearer and more relevant connections between PCEF and the City’s carbon
reduction goals
Goal #3:
Address staff and committee identified needs
Goal #4:
Address remaining audit recommendations
Program updates and structural
improvements
Responsive solicitations
Example path ahead
Response solicitations on 2 to 4-year
interval:
Strategic solicitations
• Responsive to new policy,
community priorities
• $TBD
Targeted solicitations with RFPs on 3
Community initiated projects to 5-year interval for programs • Examples include:
requiring long-term and ongoing Transformative community
o
investment: investments
Annual solicitation:
Multifamily/commercial building
• Affordable multifamily o
•$40-60M annually
financing incentive
retrofits/energy upgrades
• $1.5 million average
$200 - 250M, 5 - 10 years
implementation grant size o
• Tree planting in East PDX
• 3-year average duration
$30 - 50M, 10 years
• 40 grants awarded annually; o
120-140 grants in managed • Efficiency and resiliency
portfolio regularly improvements on publicly-owned
and community buildings
• 5 project managers @ 25
grants each o $30 - 80M, multi-year
Program updates and structural improvements
Steps and timeline
Step Approx. Date
Refine scope, options, and draft proposal for accelerated funding and Late August/
addressing staff/committee findings and recommendations to date. Early September
Solicit and refine proposal based on targeted early feedback from key September
stakeholder groups
PCEF Committee review/approval for public comment Early October
Public comment period Late October
Proposal refinement/revision November 2022
PCEF Committee deliberation and recommendation to City Council Nov/Dec 2022
Questions-
• How can we make the best use of your time?
• What will you need to keep you informed and engaged
through this process?
• Are there parts of this you are less interested in?
• Who would you like to hear from?
• What is most important to prioritize as we investigate
opportunities to accelerate funding?
• What concerns do you have?
• What opportunities do you see?
Break (15 minutes)
Meeting will resume at 7:15 pm
Committee member comments
A program by City of Portland,
Bureau of Planning and Sustainability
VISIT portland.gov/bps/cleanenergy
Guiding Principles
Invest in people, livelihoods, places, and
processes that build climate resilience and
community wealth, foster healthy
communities, and support regenerative
systems. Avoid and mitigate displacement,
especially resulting from gentrification
Advance systems change Implement transparent funding,
pressures.
that addresses historic and oversight, and engagement processes
current discrimination. that promote continuous learning,
Center all disadvantaged and programmatic checks and balances,
marginalized groups – and improvement. Demonstrate
particularly Black and achievement of equitable social,
Indigenous people economic, and environmental benefit.
Remain accountable to target
beneficiaries, grantees, and all
Trust community knowledge, experience, Portlanders.
innovation, and leadership. Honor and build on
existing work and partnerships, while supporting
capacity building for emerging community groups
and diverse coalitions. Engage with and invest in
community-driven approaches that foster
community power to create meaningful change.
Modified consensus decision making process
• Proposal – put forth for consideration by Committee member
• Temperature check – each Committee member indicates how comfortable they are with making
an affirmative decision
• Discussion – additional discussion if needed
• Amendments – Committee members can offer amendments to the original proposal
• Decision – each Committee member can 1) affirm the proposal, 2) stand aside, or 3) indicate that
“no” they do not support the proposal. Note that standing aside is counted as a decision to affirm
for the purposes of approving a proposal.
The following minimum number of affirmative decisions is required for a decision to represent the
position of the PCEF Committee.
• When 6 or 7 Committee members are present : 5 Affirmative decisions
• When 8 or 9 Committee members are present : 6 Affirmative decisions