Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) Grants Committee
June 30th, 6:00 to 8:00 pm
Meeting Minutes
Committee members present : Michael Edden Hill, Megan Horst, Jeffrey Moreland Jr., Maria Sipin,
Ranfis Villatoro, Robin Wang, Faith Graham. Shanice Brittany Clarke joined meeting at 7:15pm.
Staff present: Sam Baraso, Jaimes Valdez
Members of the Public: Gayle Palmer (East Portland Resilience Coalition), Jeni Hall (Energy Trust of
Oregon)
Public Comment: one comment via email, Tracy Farwell, acknowledging support around the decision
made on portable heat pumps. Recommending Committee members look at presentation by Electrify
Now on portable heat pumps, which are most efficient and provide a range of functions.
Program Updates
• Project Manager recruitment – interviews soon, strong applicant pool
• Data Analyst position – will create the systems to track our metrics, recruitment closed Monday.
• Committee Member recruitment closed on Sunday. Staff will do a preliminary review. Will open
it back up if not enough applicants.
Heat Response program update – Jaimes
• Seven of the Community Distribution Partners (CDPs) are onboarded and trained, and the
majority of those are now actively doing installations. A couple are launching more fully in July.
• The Earth Advantage team that has done an amazing job with logistics management, getting
units ordered.
• Around 100 units are currently deployed in the community. Installations began June 9th.
• Additional RFP for housing providers to join the cohort of distribution partners.
RFP opened June 8th, closed June 22nd. We have done outreach over the past few
o
months to some providers that had expressed some interest early on but didn't apply
back in November.
Conducting final staff review of applicants, 3-5 are going to be selected to join the
o
cohort (will notify next week).
Role clarification: these are not grants with the City of Portland or with PCEF. These are
o
subcontracts between the distribution partners.
• Media: overwhelmingly positive media coverage about the need for the program and that it has
launched and is starting to get units installed.
• Some media coverage mischaracterized that we somehow had promised to have the first units
all installed by the spring going into summer. We were able to effectively correct the record on
some of those media outlets and clarified that the initial goal was to get installations started in
May or June of 2022. We have met that goal.
• Significant ramp up needed to meet our target of 3,000 units this summer. With addition of the
new housing providers as Community Distribution Partners, we’ll be on track.
• We know that this is a long-term program that's going to build over time.
• We anticipate an RFP going out this fall to bring on additional community-based organizations
into the program.
• Questions
Robin: Will there be installations in fall and winter or will it taper off come Aug/Sept and
o
then pick up again in the spring?
We do anticipate some distribution in fall/winter but will taper down. The majority of
o
units can provide both cooling and supplemental heating, so there is benefit to
continuing if there is capacity.
Follow-up question: is there the ability in fall/winter to focus on folks that may not have
o
adequate heating?
We can consider that approach, adjusting from now when most of our prioritization has
o
focused on heat vulnerability.
Ranfis: impacts on supply chain and the recent announcement from the White House on
o
the Defense Production Act, anything that's impacting how we look at heat pumps?
Tracking it and happy to share pertinent information.
Earth Advantage did good job ordering early to get equipment here by May, and more is
o
on the way that can meet the 3000 unit goal for this year. So not an immediate
constraint, but will have to act early to get equipment for 2023 distributions. Not
positive, but I think 2 of 5 models we currently have are manufactured in U.S.
Megan: Are the numbers we’ve put out (3,000 this year and 15,000 total) still seeming a
o
reasonable target relative to interest and need? Would like to have Earth Advantage
come to a meeting for a comprehensive check-in after things have been rolling a while.
Bookmark questions about how people are using the units. Is it helping them? How is it
affecting their electric bills?
Happy to coordinate a presentation directly with the Earth Advantage staff.
o
High confidence that we can meet 3,000 unit goal. But that needs an ambitious daily
o
installation rate. New CDPs want to install a significant number of units this year.
Starting to have conversations about how we can help identify additional contractors in
o
the community that can work with our CDPs, focusing on the PCEF workforce priority
populations.
We don’t have long-term data measurement yet, but we’re in conversations with an
o
organization that's interested in doing research or measurement on a subset of the
units, potentially working with a housing provider, to track energy use, how they're used
throughout summer/winter, how they’re benefitting recipients, what temperature
they’re holding the space in.
Megan appreciates the idea of a 3rd party evaluator with objectivity.
o
Ranfis: SMART union that does HVAC and heat pump installation, contractor association
o
SMACNA. Want to make sure there is some outreach/connection there as they train
folks to do this work. Their work might be combination of commercial/residential but
might be worth touching on and understanding the current pool of experienced
workers.
Jaimes will follow up. It is the CDPs who are selecting their contractors that they work
o
with but want to make sure they're aware of the resources out there and point them
towards organizations like this that could be a potential source of contractors.
Performance metrics: presentation and discussion - Megan
• Faith, Ranfis, and Megan have been working on our program metrics, reporting evaluation.
Bringing you a more final version of the draft measures presented in February.
• Our goal on the PCEF program outcome measures is multipurpose.
Code requirement to report to the public and to City Council on the PCEF program and
o
all of our goals, particularly climate & social justice goals.
Provide high-level metrics on main webpage, click in for more details. Stories that share
o
impact.
A lot of different audiences for the dashboard which makes this a complex project:
o
Mayor & City Council, general/voting public, future grantees.
Can help Committee and staff reflect on where we're meeting our goals, identify where
o
we're not on track, where to make changes and engagement and investment, etc.
• Already have a lot of data (quarterly grantee reporting) that has been compiled and shared in some
ways and now we're trying to take it to the next level.
• After Committee looked at draft measures, staff conducted community engagement.
6 listening sessions with topic groups. Key stakeholder responses on are these the right
o
metrics, is it doable for grantees to report on, are they meaningful. Lots of great feedback.
Shared with Commissioner Rubio and her staff.
o
Public survey for additional input.
o
Staff made modifications in response to feedback.
o
• Ranfis: it’s a balance of displaying top-level outcomes and graphics that are user-friendly for all
parties with the desire for stakeholders to dig deeper in different categories.
• Key themes from focus groups:
Strong desire for more measures. Balance desire for simple and more at the same time.
o
Longer-term evaluation questions that we decided were not really about individual grantee
o
project reporting. Beyond what will emerge with individual grantee projects (e.g. tracking
individual career trajectories over time, tree health over 10, 20, 30 years)
 We think funds should be reserved within the overall PCEF fund for that kind of
analysis/research.
Program dashboard versus project dashboard.
o
 We want a program dashboard showing how PCEF areas (energy efficiency,
regenerative ag, etc.) cumulatively contribute.
 Balance with folks’ desire to see the breakdown within our areas, clicking into more
specifics (project dashboard).
 Need to make it clear to avoid confusion.
 Hoping it will be updated annually.
Interest in stories, not all data and numbers. This will definitely be incorporated, links to
o
grantee videos, written stories, etc.
Data sovereignty and demographic information.
o
 PCEF serves priority populations, so we do have to track for having that impact.
 But sensitive to grantee concerns, specifically from some Native American
community members with concerns about control over their own data.
 Brought up a need for further discussion on data sovereignty.
 Staff have already begun thinking about how to minimize issues, how we can be
responsive, and meet folks’ needs, how partners can report info about populations
served without having to turn over a lot of intrusive data.
• Mock-up of main landing page with 5 high-level metrics: (focus on content, not looks right now)
Investment, Climate, Workers & Businesses, Co-Benefits and Program Stewardship
o
Main data point for each telling the overall story of PCEF. You'll be able to click into a page
o
for each of those.
• Investment: the main difference from before is the addition of a measure of how many grants to
organizations not previously funded by PCEF (came from feedback in focus groups).
Not sure we have a goal associated with it as it can be in seen in different ways (important
o
to have funding for new work but also ongoing support of existing good work).
• Climate:
More detail on energy efficiency and renewable energy added.
o
Place holder for transportation for now as we are hearing a lot about this area.
o
• Worker & Business Measures: the main change is an addition of a measure for climate education in
support of workforce development.
Depends on conversation about what we fund in the workforce development bucket, still
o
under deliberation.
• Co-benefits – the additional environmental, social, and economic benefits.
Saw the most change from the focus group and community input. Regen ag/green
o
infrastructure (RAGI) measures were more thinly developed in the draft, so we got more
input. Folks felt it was important to share the way projects are contributing benefits in
addition to GHG reduction.
Landed on having a checklist of practices, (e.g. habitat creation, habitat connectivity) to get
o
a sense of the range among projects while reducing data collection burdens.
Also helpful for helping us share in the future what we mean by RAGI because we'll have
o
these lists of activities associated with them.
Additional specific practices added under non-GHG and social benefit and some changes to
o
climate resiliency. We added things about climate awareness and first foods.
• Program stewardship – main thing added is the addition of measure regarding timely payment to
grantees
• In sum, it's been a very robust community engagement process. Bringing in what staff have learned
and heard from our grantees over the last year collecting the first year of data. Feeling good about
moving forward.
• Reminder that we are also responding to the audit in developing reporting measures.
• Questions/discussion
Maria: is there a part of this dashboard that would be especially helpful/responsive to
o
future audits? Does the info make it easy to interpret performance? Would parts of the
evaluation and reporting work need a lot of context beyond the dashboard?
 We imagine the landing page is for 5 big questions that an auditor, general voter,
City councilor, advocate, critic etc. might want to know: what projects, who
benefitted, impact on climate, impact on workers & businesses, what other
benefits.
 Data will have a little explanation when you click into it. User experience/comms
expert will help take it from wonky dataset to tell our story about the investment.
 Maria hopes that media will contact for more details behind some data points.
Megan agrees, as some data without context could be interpreted in a variety of
ways.
Next step after approving metrics will be refining goals within each of the relevant
o
categories, setting appropriate benchmarks/targets.
 The City’s climate action plan and climate emergency declaration goals are for the
City as a whole. We will be coming up with more fine-tuned goals for the $80-100
million we’re investing annually. How PCEF plugs in to the broader City goals.
 Michael: will there be data interpretation/explanation included, e.g. if data meets or
exceeds baselines / is considered successful? – Yes, will we need to explain where
we are falling short, or exceeding targets and need to be more ambitious in goal
setting, etc. Providing narrative for audiences that want both high-level and detail.
Maria and Ranfis had a good discussion with community members about their interest in
o
spatial analysis and visual representation of workers, where they live and work. Making sure
the East Portland data stands out and we can tell that story in detail.
Jeffrey: important to make it clear to contractors that we are here to support them in
o
gathering required information, that we have a method and it’s attainable for them to do.
Sam: will come back to the conversation around being more focused around particular
o
geographies soon. Mapping the last round of grants elevated that East Portland lacks the
same density or capacity of nonprofit infrastructure of other areas.
Ranfis: noting that physical projects in one location can have workers coming from East
o
Portland or other areas. Larger economic social benefit that we might be missing.
Michael: would like to see data on where wage funding is going geographically.
o
Jeffrey: very important that we are tracking how projects are benefitting the people who
o
actually live in the communities, not just building infrastructure that doesn’t benefit those
individuals (as has happened in gentrification of northeast).
Committee members are ready to pass support for these metrics with the understanding
o
that they will evolve and staff will work on the element of worker geography (hearing lots of
interest in this).
• Jeffrey proposed to approve the performance measures defined today with the understanding that
it is a living document and we will continue to refine it as we discover new things in the future.
Ranfis seconded the proposal.
o
Michael, Megan, Robin, Faith, Maria, Shanice approve the proposal. Proposal passes.
o
Thank you to all.
o
Meeting Adjourned