CCiittiieess aanndd tthhee EEnnvviirroonnmmeenntt ((CCAATTEE))
Volume 14 Issue 2 Article 2
2021
CCoonntteexxttuuaall CCoonnssiiddeerraattiioonnss ooff GGrreeeenn SSttoorrmmwwaatteerr IInnffrraassttrruuccttuurree
SSiittiinngg
Dexter H. Locke
USDA Forest Service, Baltimore Field Station, dexter.locke@gmail.com
Amanda K. Phillips de Lucas
Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, phillipsa@caryinstitute.org
Colleen Murphy-Dunning
Yale School of the Environment, Urban Resources Initiative, Hixon Center for Urban Ecology,
colleen.murphy-dunning@yale.edu
Dawn Henning
Engineering Department, City of New Haven, Connecticut, DHenning@newhavenct.gov
Giovanni Zinn
Engineering Department, City of New Haven, Connecticut, gzinn@newhavenct.gov
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate
RReeccoommmmeennddeedd CCiittaattiioonn
Locke, Dexter H.; Phillips de Lucas, Amanda K.; Murphy-Dunning, Colleen; Henning, Dawn; and Zinn,
Giovanni (2021) "Contextual Considerations of Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting," Cities and the
Environment (CATE): Vol. 14: Iss. 2, Article 2.
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202
Available at: https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Center for Urban Resilience at Digital Commons @
Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School. It has been accepted for inclusion in Cities and the
Environment (CATE) by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and
Loyola Law School. For more information, please contact digitalcommons@lmu.edu.
CCoonntteexxttuuaall CCoonnssiiddeerraattiioonnss ooff GGrreeeenn SSttoorrmmwwaatteerr IInnffrraassttrruuccttuurree SSiittiinngg
Green infrastructure increasingly is used to ameliorate water quality and quantity problems caused by
runoff in cities. Studies show how the spatial distribution of these Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI)
sites are unevenly distributed relative to socioeconomic and demographic groups. Often this is described
as an indicator of perpetuated environment injustice, given the purported social and environmental
benefits of GSI. To assess equity, researchers often examine either who gets what with respect to
environmental ‘goods’ such as tree canopy and other green infrastructures, or investigate the procedures,
decision making processes, and power structures pertaining to planning processes. This paper uses both
spatial analyses to examine where GSI is located and who lives nearby in New Haven, CT, and illuminates
the processes by which those locations were determined. An environmental injustice pattern was not
observed: most GSI were located in low-income communities of color. However, the process that led to
the siting had very little to do with who was living where. Instead, GSI siting decisions were determined by
funding opportunities and their site selection criteria, flooding, combined sewer infrastructure, and
avoiding infrastructure conflicts on a street segment. Future spatial analyses could consider the implicit
or explicit baselines for equity in light of the processes and constraints that determine how and where GSI
gets installed, and better incorporate the process of green infrastructure allocation in the chosen
analytical metrics. By examining the process (ie the “how”) and the outcomes (ie the “what went where”)
this study broadens the spatial analyses to include embedded knowledge from those who actually make
the decisions that ultimately determine the location of GSI.
KKeeyywwoorrddss
Urban ecology, green infrastructure, environmental justice, New Haven, spatial analyses
AAcckknnoowwlleeddggeemmeennttss
1. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT: Metadata, data (Neighborhood and Census boundaries, GSI and CSO
points) and code for replication are available via Locke 2021. 2. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Lindsay
Campbell and Joanna Solins provided expert advice and input on an earlier version of this paper. The
findings and conclusions in this paper are those of the author(s) and should not be construed to represent
any official USDA or U.S. Government determination or policy.
This article is available in Cities and the Environment (CATE): https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
Locke et al.: Green Stormwa ter Infrastructure Siting
1 INTRODUCTION
The landmark United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice demonstrated social and
economic disparities in the distribution of environmental hazards (Commission for Racial
Justice, 1987). Spatial coincidence, a technique that demonstrates connection between the siting
of a hazard and the socio-demographic characteristics of the surrounding area, a measure of the
distribution of environmental risk, became a primary test for whether decisions about siting were
deemed unequal (Chakraborty et al., 2011). In recent years, a growing body of literature has also
emphasized how the presence of environmental amenities such as parks, playgrounds, or
recreational spaces may contribute to broader framings or analyses of environmental injustice
(Crompton, 2001; Giles-Corti et al., 2005; Rigolon et al., 2018). Moving to understand the
distribution of amenities and services, in addition to hazards, emerged as a conceptual addition to
the environmental injustice hypothesis. This addition accounts for both the procedures that
govern environmental decision making and the presence of perceived environmental value
within a demarcated area (Grove et al., 2018). By tracking the distribution of amenities, scholars
suggested that patterns might reveal legacies of bureaucratic, procedural, and administrative
decision making that privileged white property owners and economically empowered groups
(Boone et al., 2009).
Attention to the distribution of environmental amenities simultaneously stimulated
policies, programs, and projects that seek to improve access to and the quality of nature within
cities, such as MillionTreesNYC (MillionTrees NYC, 2008) and Philadelphia’s Greenworks plan
(Greenworks Philadelphia, 2009). Many cities have turned to green infrastructure (GI) as one
mechanism of improving environmental quality while also increasing the distribution of
amenities (Dunn 2010). Green Infrastructure is often framed as a corrective technology that can
fix or ameliorate existing environmental harms such as nutrient loading or recurrent sewer
overflows (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005; Pataki et al., 2011). Additionally, GI may
provide co-benefits such as aesthetic improvements, space for recreation, and positive health
outcomes (Benedict and McMahon, 2001; Coutts and Hahn, 2015; Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, 2005; Tzoulas et al., 2007). This conceptual positioning of GI as not only a
neighborhood amenity but also a municipality-wide technological fix raises complex questions
for both planners and analysts. For instance, what is the spatial scale of benefit delivery when a
rain garden is assumed to improve regional water quality and provide neighborhood aesthetic
improvements? Or, what constitutes the most appropriate unit of analysis to match the scaled
conceptual framing of GI as an environmental amenity?
Complicating matters are the broad forms that constitute the suite of GI, and the
anticipated benefits. Some use the term to refer to a system of interconnected green spaces
(Benedict and McMahon, 2001; Tzoulas et al., 2007), while others understand GI as additions to
the built environment that contribute to the management of stormwater (BenDor et al., 2018;
Grabowski, Z.J., McPhearson, T., Matlser, A.M., Groffman, P., Pickett) Forthcoming). This
second definition, often evoked by engineers, planners, and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), defines GI as a “cost-effective, resilient approach to managing wet
weather impacts that provide many community benefits” (United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), 2020). The second definition is often distinguished as green
stormwater infrastructure (GSI) and refers to a suite of technologies and best management
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 1
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
practices that can retain or detain stormwater runoff. While this paper focuses on green
stormwater infrastructure, both definitions generally position GI as a positive amenity that can
provide functional and community value. Note that depending on circumstances, GI (Lyytimäki
and Sipilä, 2009) and even urban trees can produce ecosystem disservices (Roman et al., 2021).
Further, because GI and GSI provide external value, it is often understood as an environmental
fix to an existing hazard such as water pollution caused by urban runoff, flooding, or a lack of
community green space (Finewood, 2016; Finewood et al., 2019).
Many municipalities across the US have installed GSI to solve or attempt to ameliorate
water quality or quantity problems stemming from stormwater runoff in cites. Most often these
installations consist of facility types like bioswales, enhanced tree pits, or rain gardens, which
can range widely in size, function, and possible co-benefits. For instance, a rain barrel, although
it provides a stormwater capture function, is not capable of being used for outdoor recreation.
While GI are capable of providing co-benefits, the types of benefits vary across technological
types and/or across different scales in different ways.
Further complicating the issue of what types of benefits GSI can provide in different
locations, the functional efficacy and applicability of GSI is linked to a multitude of
environmental and land use factors including, but not limited to, soil type (United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2011), landscape context (Pauleit et al., 2017), and
legacy uses (Frickel and Elliott, 2008). For municipalities installing GSI to meet regulatory
requirements, these environmental conditions often decide the eventual location of a facility.
Moreover, utility conflicts and legacy infrastructure systems (Baltimore City Department of
Public Works, 2017, 36), prevent installation in certain locations altogether. Multiple
environmental and landscape factors are perceived by planners and engineers as fixed
determinants of the location and provision of GI’s benefits across the landscape.
Given the emerging body of literature in urban ecology, urban planning, and science and
technology studies (STS) demonstrating how infrastructural and environmental features
implicitly and explicitly produce segregationist effects, it is essential to understand GSI
implementation within this larger history (Grove et al., 2018; Hoffman et al., 2020; Namin et al.,
2020; Phillips de Lucas, 2020). Indeed, as GI and GSI continue to be supported by planners,
engineers, and community organizations for their ability to deliver multiple ecosystem services, a
need emerges to evaluate our existing methods for assessing environmental injustice following
the provisioning of apparent amenities.
Put another way, if GI and GSI are framed as practices that enhance the quality of
environments, a need emerges to evaluate how we assess whether the presence of an amenity
serves as an appropriate metric to assess environmental justice. Researchers often examine either
who gets what with respect to environmental ‘bads’ like pollution and hazards (Chakraborty et
al., 2011) or ‘goods’ such as tree canopy and other green infrastructures (Crompton, 2001; Giles-
Corti et al., 2005; Rigolon et al., 2018), or investigate the procedures, decision making processes,
and power structures pertaining to planning processes (Mohai and Saha, 2006; Pellow, 2007;
Pulido, 2000). It is unclear whether existing spatial methods for assessing environmental
inequality patterns, such as measuring the distribution of GSI installations within a given spatial
area, represent the most appropriate unit of analysis when applied to green infrastructure.
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 2
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
This article asserts that to assess GSI’s role in environmental justice, the siting process
must be examined in conjunction with and inform the spatial analytical approach. This paper
therefore uses both spatial analyses to examine where green stormwater infrastructure (204
bioswales) in New Haven, CT were installed from 2013 to 2019, who lives nearby, and
illuminates the processes by which those locations were determined. By examining the outcomes
(ie the “what went where”) and the process (ie the “how”), this study broadens the spatial
analyses to include embedded knowledge from those who actually make the decisions that
ultimately determine the location of GSI. Integrating the planning and siting process improves
the assessment of environmental justice and the interpretations, by informing and refining the
spatial analyses to better assess the relationship between green infrastructure and inequality.
Further, this assessment of environmental justice destabilizes the presumption of the presence of
GSI as an inherent a ‘good’ within spatial analysis. Instead, by describing the linkages between
pattern and process we gain a more comprehensive sense of how technologies come to embody
particular meanings, authority, and power within environments (Winner, 1980).
2 Justice, Inequity, and Green Stormwater Infrastructure
2.1 Metrics of Environmental (In)Justice
The 1987 report by the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice (Commission for
Racial Justice, 1987) importantly documented environmental distributional injustice, and
simultaneously advanced a method for measuring the demographic characteristics of
communities located near these industries. The main approach would later become common
place. The report presented the results from two cross-sectional studies. The first examined
whether “variables of race and socioeconomic status played a significant role in the location of
commercial hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities” (9). The second study
drew from population, location, and comparative data to describe the presence of toxic waste in
“racial and ethnic communities” (12). In their study, community as a conceptual unit, was
captured by 5-digit zip code area, while racial and ethnic categories used in analysis drew from
Census data. These two variables, a spatially bracketed community paired with demographic
population data, ushered in many studies concerned with tracing existing environmental
disparities. This research often followed a basic formula: a fixed harm (e.g., industries producing
toxic waste) was analyzed within a community (e.g., Zip Code) and population (e.g., racial,
ethnic, and economic categories) context (Downey, 2005; Holifield, 2001; Holifield et al., 2017).
The report from the Commission for Racial Justice paved the way for many
Environmental Justice (EJ) focused inquiries. This field of research contends with two distinct
methodological questions – what units of analysis researchers should deploy, and what
definitions ought to be deployed as a standard of proof for the existence of environmental
inequality? In regard to units of analysis, debates persist to this day about how to quantify
metrics and indices that demonstrate that environmentally unjust outcomes are present. These
debates can take the form of what counts as a community (Taquino et al., 2002), which
demographic populations are most impacted (Anderton et al., 1994), or the conditions or
intentionality of siting decisions (Hurley, 1997; Mohai and Saha, 2015). Importantly, the
definitions of environmental inequality that a researcher draws from influences not only the units
of analysis selected for a study, but also the conclusions that can be drawn from the analysis, to
begin with. Definitionally, Liam Downey has argued that “quantitative environmental inequality
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 3
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
research has been too narrowly focused on one set of environmental inequality outcomes”
(Downey, 2005, 2). As Downey discusses, this narrowness is often evidenced by researchers and
practitioners who deploy different definitions of environmental inequality based on their
professional orientation. Disciplinary definitions of environmental inequality may privilege one
set of measurements or desired outcomes over another. For instance, Downey identifies
discriminatory intent inequality (i.e. whether a disamenity was installed intentionally in a
minoritized region) and disparate exposure inequality (whether the exposure to toxics
disproportionately impacts a particular demographic group) as commonly utilized definitions
within EJ literature that produce different analyses and findings.
Both abovementioned definitions create a relationship between the presence of a hazard
and the production of disparate environmental risk – either through the intentional siting of a
facility in an impoverished community or by greater exposure to a hazard than other surrounding
populations. Like the Commission for Racial Justice report, these definitions are concerned with
the spatial relationship between a fixed harm within a community and population context.
Conversely, neither definition is positioned to consider how environmental amenities may
mitigate risk or signal additional inequities within a community. Simply, the definitions utilized
to study environmental inequality do not easily adapt for the selection of units of analysis that
can spatially contextualize or determine environmental hazards and/or assets.
Additionally, recent scholarship has demonstrated that environmental inequality is not
solely caused by the presence of toxic waste, hazardous industries, or illegal dumping. Inequality
may also emerge in the distribution and accessibility of environmental benefits such as parks,
street trees, or outdoor recreation spaces (Landry and Chakraborty, 2009; Rigolon et al., 2018).
Legacy infrastructures such as highways or historical land uses like industrial sites and/or
landfills may accumulate hazards over time that produce risk at uneven spatial and temporal
scales (Frickel, 2008; Frickel and Elliott, 2008). Further, while all of the above-mentioned
sources have a clear spatial correlate, the procedures and historical patterns that contributed to
environmental decision making are far more opaque and less amenable to distributional analysis
(Bocking, 2004; Light, 2009). We point to these multiple and intersecting concerns not to raise
doubt about existing analyses, but rather to highlight the continued importance of carefully
selecting the units of analysis that support specific definitions of environmental inequality. The
process and reasoning for unit selection are of even greater importance as definitions are adapted
to consider how perceived environmental amenities, such as green infrastructure, may influence
assessments of environmental inequality, or increasingly, inequity.
2.2 Green Stormwater Infrastructure and Environmental Injustice
Green stormwater infrastructure recently emerged as an environmental solution for cities facing
challenges associated with aging infrastructure systems, impervious surfaces, dwindling budgets,
and increased calls from residents for improving the quality and quantity of public green spaces
(Ahern, 2007; Mell, 2009; Roe and Mell, 2013). Installing green infrastructure promises an array
of possible benefits. Supporters of this technology describe possible economic (Schilling and
Logan 2008, Jaffe 2010), hydrologic (Liu et al. 2017, Rai et al 2019), habitat (Filazzola et al.
2019, Knapp et al. 2019), and social benefits (Center for Neighborhood Technology, Buijis et al
2016) associated with installing GI. In municipal agencies GI is often positioned as desirable for
its smaller size, lower costs, and ease of siting compared to grey infrastructures within dense
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 4
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
urban areas. Prioritizing these values within the technical choices of stormwater management
options, as we will discuss in section 3, often emerges against the backdrop of strained municipal
budgets, regulatory mandates, and high costs of separating grey sewer systems. GI installation
may cost less upfront than sewer separation or end of pipe filtration upgrades, and that is the case
in New Haven.
A smaller body of literature utilizes spatial analysis to understand the landscape and
sociodemographic contexts of where GSI is placed (Baker et al., 2019; Chan and Hopkins, 2017;
McPhillips and Matsler, 2018). The variety of GSI types examined, the assorted spatial units of
analyses, different analytical techniques, diverse set of covariates considered, and wide-ranging
climatic conditions complicates identifying a clear distributional pattern. Distributional studies
are often framed as contributing to assessments of, or conversations pertaining to, the spatial
equity of environmental features. Spatial equity is often described as the evaluation of “the
benefits and burdens associated with the distribution of environmental and social amenities”
(Landry and Chakraborty, 2009, 2652). What the literature has done consistently, however, is
count GSI installations within areas that also have sociodemographic data associated with them
in an attempt to understand distributional equity.
While equality and equity are sometimes used interchangeably in the literature, we
maintain that it is essential to keep the two terms, and subsequently, methods of analysis
definitionally separated in environmental injustice inquiries. As Christopher Boone, et al, write
“Equity or fairness of distribution, which incorporates, needs, choices, and merits, is more
difficult to measure and evaluate than equality of distribution” (2009). By this reasoning, spatial
analysis concerned with equity must be performed within a local context where needs, choices,
and merits are both documented and incorporated into the analysis. Equality, by contrast, refers
to an even distribution of benefits and burdens. We argue, and as our case discussion
demonstrates, that understanding historical patterns of development, deliberative processes, and
project motivation are essential components to assessing whether spatial or distributional equity
is an outcome of a GI project. These qualitative, and often historical, data identify and describe
the processes that inform the eventual spatial pattern. Without describing these trends, spatial
analysis of distribution may risk reifying inequities – environmental and otherwise.
2.3 Research Questions
The remainder of this paper uses planning narratives, archival data, and project documents to
identify the needs, merits, and choices evoked during the planning and siting process of green
stormwater infrastructure in New Haven from 2013-2019. In the concluding discussion, we
discuss at greater length how attending to these narratives enhances analyses of spatial equity. To
test whether the siting of green stormwater infrastructure is equitable we ask the following
questions:
1. Process: What processes informed where GSI was located in New Haven? How were
local needs addressed in this process? What were the motivations for installing GSI?
How were siting decisions made?
2. Pattern: Where are the green infrastructure installations and which socioeconomic and
demographic groups live near those installations?
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 5
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
3 METHOD
3.1 Study Area
New Haven, Connecticut, is a city with a population of just over 130,000 (United States Census
Bureau) located in southern New England, north of the Long Island sound (41°18'29.0"N,
72°55'38.3"W). The municipality is ~19 mi2 and has a temperate climate. From 1981 to 2010 the
average annual January and July temperatures were 30.0 °F and 74.0 °F, respectively. The
average annual precipitation is approximately 47 inches (NOAA, 2020).
Figure 1. New Haven’s Neighborhood boundaries by poverty, CSOs, and the Downtown
Watershed. The Downtown watershed experiences flooding.
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 6
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
Figure 2. Poverty is concentrated in the center of the study area, which is spatially coincident
with the Downtown watershed, green stormwater infrastructure is predominantly sited within
watersheds, which tend to have higher poverty rates. Long Wharf (shown in gray) is a
predominantly industrial area and without residential land.
3.2 Data
3.2.1 Green Infrastructure Locations
The City of New Haven’s Engineering Department uses GIS as a data management tool for its
Green Stormwater Infrastructure installations. The GSI geodatabase was created using three
different methods. For the smaller projects (less than 10 GSI), points were created using
ArcMap/ArcGIS Pro desktop version. For the Downtown bioswales project, the City had to site
up to 200 bioswales within an approximately 600-acre area. In order to capture as much runoff as
possible, the City sought to install GSI as close to the existing catch basins as possible.
Therefore, a catch basin layer was used to create a Collector app so field data could be collected
and managed using GIS. The goal of the Collector app was to document the space available for
GSI in the public right of way by creating candidate point locations. Impediments within 50 feet
upstream of existing catch basins were documented along with the distance between these
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 7
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
impediments and the existing catch basins. Additionally, the width of the sidewalk was also
captured. All data were stored within the catch basin data point in GIS. When space was
available and GSI was constructed in one of these locations, the Status field was changed to
reflect “Constructed”. Finally, a consultant was used to create the final 70 GSI locations in a
separate geodatabase. These 70 GSI locations reflect a project led by GNHWPCA to build
bioswales in combined sewersheds draining to the West River. Because of New Haven’s
relatively small geographic and population size (relative to other often-studied areas), and the
few GSI actors on the scene, we can be reasonably confident that the entire universe of street-
side bioswales are accounted for in this paper.
3.2.2 Neighborhoods and Census Geographies
Neighborhood boundaries and demographic data came from DataHaven
https://www.ctdatahaven.org/communities. DataHaven is a non-profit organization based in New
Haven that developed neighborhood boundaries with The City in 2012, in order to support the
Comprehensive Plan Data Book. Most of the neighborhood boundaries align with 2010 Census
tract boundaries, but there are a few instances where Census tracts or block groups are split, to
better match locally-relevant understandings of neighborhoods. DataHaven created
neighborhood estimates by allocating Census data to corresponding neighborhoods using the
share of population or households that fell within each geographic area. The very small number
of people and households living within the boundaries of the city’s Long Wharf neighborhood,
which is predominantly a commercial and industrial area, were automatically assigned to the
directly adjacent neighborhood called the Hill.
Census block group geographic boundaries, socioeconomic, and demographic data for the
US Census Bureau’s 2015-2019 5-year American Community Survey were accessed via the
tidycensus R package using the `get_acs` function (Walker, 2020). Variables included race,
homeownership, vacancy, and educational attainment, to be consistent with other similar EJ
research. Data and code for replication can be found in Locke 2021.
3.3 History and Process
Authors gathered relevant city, sewer, and storm water plans from New Haven dating back to
1979. These planning documents are placed within their broader context within the historical
studies of the technological evolution and design choices pertaining to urban sewerage and water
management. For more recent discussion of process, we spoke with engineers, planners, and
non-profit organizations involved in the implementation of green infrastructure.
3.4 Statistical Analyses
Analyses were carried out separately with the Neighborhood and block group boundaries. New
Haven’s neighborhoods (n = 20) are larger than its Census block groups (n = 106).
Neighborhoods are better understood by residents and planners, but their numbers are fewer, and
the polygons are larger and potentially more heterogenous than block groups. Block groups are
poorly understood by residents, but there are more of them allowing for greater statistical
flexibility, and more internally homogenous. Given the pros and cons of each set of geographic
boundaries, analyses were conducted separately for both and compared. For both sets of
boundaries, the number of green stormwater infrastructure installations were counted in their
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 8
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
containing polygons using the st_join function in the sf package (Pebesma, 2018). Next odds
ratios of the green infrastructure installations relative to the population were calculated. To do so,
the total green infrastructure per capita was calculated as the sum of all green infrastructure
installation sites divided by the sum of the population. This represents an overall GI per capita
installation rate. Next, for each polygon, in either Neighborhoods or block groups, an expected
rate was calculated as that polygon’s population times the overall rate. Then the actual GI
installation counts per polygon were divided by the expected rate to arrive at odds ratio per
polygon. An odds ratio of 2 means that the number of GI installations is twice the expected
study-area wide rate, while an odds ratio of 0.5 means that there are half as many GI installations
in that area as expected, given its population and the study-area wide expectation. Again, the
expectation is based on the overall rate, so the baseline reference is a totally equal distribution of
GI relative to the population in a specified geographic area. The pois.exact function in the
epitools package (Aragon, 2020) was used to estimate 95% confidence intervals around the odds
ratios. All analyses were carried out with R version 3.6.0 (2019-04-26).
The odds ratios for neighborhoods are provided along key social and demographic data
for qualitative comparison. With twenty neighborhoods, and one of those without people due to
predominantly industrial land uses (Long Wharf), bivariate statistical relationships are likely
spurious due to small sample sizes. Moreover, typically the motivation for statistical inference
arises from having samples and seeking to generalize to a larger set of cases. Here all of the
relevant data are in hand. Among the more numerous block groups, correlations with
socioeconomic and demographic data were conducted to show how GI installation varies relative
to socioeconomic and demographic characteristics.
4 RESULTS
4.1 History and Process
Like many older municipalities, New Haven was originally developed with only one sewer to
convey both sewage and stormwater to the harbor and surrounding waterbodies. This type of
sewer, called a combined sewer, was frequently chosen in the American urban context beginning
in the 1860’s. The choice to build combined sewer systems emerged from several factors
including a lack of precedence for separated systems, hesitancy to experiment, and cost concerns
(Tarr, 1996). Further, as Joel Tarr describes, the cost-benefit analysis conducted by engineers
argued that building a separated system to support sewerage recycling for agricultural purposes
would not produce enough value. He writes, “they (engineers) believed that sewage could be
safely deposited in the nearby waterways, a belief based on the theory that running water purifies
itself” (Tarr, 1996, 137). The choice to initially prioritize cost minimization led to future water
quality issues requiring additional, even costlier fixes (Tarr, 1996).
As the population of New Haven began to grow in the 1920’s, so did pollution within the
receiving waterbodies. Sewage treatment works were constructed at the present site of the East
Shore Water Pollution Abatement Facility. In order to ensure that the treatment plant was not
overwhelmed during large rain events, various combined sewer overflow (CSO) regulators were
installed by the City to provide wet weather relief by discharging excess sewage and stormwater
into waterbodies when the treatment plant is at capacity during rain events. Areas of the City
developed after the construction of the abatement facility were built with separated sewer
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 9
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
systems, with one pipe to convey sewage to the treatment plant and another to convey storm
water directly to surrounding waterbodies.
As the development and construction continued in New Haven, surfaces once permeable
were replaced with pavement and concrete. In turn, the growing area of impervious surfaces
increased the volume and frequency of combined sewer overflow events, reducing the quality of
waterbodies throughout the City (Tarr, 1996). In 1979, Cardinal Engineering Associates, hired
by the city of New Haven, developed a sewer facility plan recommending sewer separation to
reduce combined sewage overflows and associated pollution. The creation of this long-term plan
coincided with broader social and political shifts including federal regulations such as the Clean
Water Act. The 1979 report emphasizes both state and federal water quality and effluent
limitations as motivations for pursing separation (City of New Haven 1979). The total cost
proposed for this plan put the proposed budget at $21,768,000 in 1979 dollars. Adjusted for
inflation, this amounts to just under $80 million in today’s money. Of the 24 proposed sewer
separation projects outlined in the 1979 report, only a third have been completed as of 2021. The
costs of these eight projects were significant. The most recent figure listed by Cardinal
Engineering puts the total cost at over 40 million dollars (2013 dollars) (Cardinal Engineering).
2005 marked a major governance shift in the management of New Havens sewer system
with the formation of The Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority (GNHWPCA).
This regional authority approved by legislators in New Haven, East Haven, Hamden, and
Woodbridge was formed to manage over “500 miles of sewer mains and 30 pump stations”
(Greater New Haven WPCA, 2021). While the agency continues to pursue sewer separation
project, installing green infrastructure has also emerged as a strategy to address CSO overflow
events. Green infrastructure projects are supported by the authority for their cost effectiveness
compared to grey (separation) projects (Sgroi et al., 2015).
At present, the City of New Haven has 13 combined sewer outfalls (CSOs, Figure 1) and
about 250 storm sewer outfalls. A sewershed is the area of land that drains to a particular storm
or combined sewer outfall(s). The City’s largest sewershed, the Downtown sewershed,
encompasses approximately 800 acres, and covers most of Downtown, part of the Hill
neighborhood, and most of the Long Wharf neighborhood. Downtown and the Hill are some of
the oldest neighborhoods in New Haven and contain the original combined sewer system. Only
parts of these neighborhoods have been separated. Additionally, the Downtown sewershed
suffers from chronic flooding during high intensity rainfall events. A 600-acre portion of the
sewershed (Figure 1), drains towards the railyard, which has two pipes (twin 4’x6’ box culvert
and a 66” circular pipe) underneath to convey flow to the Harbor, about half of the capacity
needed to drain this area. This bottleneck, along with high water levels in the Harbor, further
limits the capacity of the sewer system and contributes to flooding. In addition, Long Wharf was
created of fill material and is extremely low-lying at some locations. When the water level in the
Harbor is high from the ocean tides and there is rainfall, there is not enough head to push water
through the outfalls without the water level exceeding ground levels. Due to the high cost of
separating sewers, recurrent flooding issues, and land characteristics, this watershed was
identified by the City of New Haven as an appropriate area to site GSI interventions.
Below we discuss how various stakeholders determined the location of eventual green
infrastructure projects. By providing this preceding context the governance, economic, and
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 10
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
environmental factors shaping location determination of green infrastructure can be seen as a
continuation of sewer system construction and retrofit. This suggests that understanding the
spatial distribution of GSI alone may fail to consider how broader drivers of infrastructural
uptake led to development in some parts of the city rather than others. Here, we argue that the
process of determining the location of GI began in 1979 with the prioritization of sewer
separation projects, rather than in 2013 when New Haven’s first bioswale was installed. This
context also complicates questions of equity and justice– particularly when considering
procedural or transgenerational concerns. The Downtown and Hill neighborhoods have been
excluded from sewer separation projects that occurred elsewhere in the watershed. This
complicates the neat binary promised with the presence/absence models assessing the spatial
distribution of green infrastructure. Can green infrastructure be understood as an asset if its
presence signals an absence of other infrastructural investments?
The City of New Haven’s first installed green stormwater infrastructure, a bioswale, out
of necessity. Utility conflicts prevented a planned catch basin installation during a sewer
separation project in 2013 and there was a relatively small street section (roughly 15 parking
spaces worth of space) that had nowhere to drain when it rained. The City Engineer suggested a
bioswale and The Urban Resources Initiative (URI) installed the practice to infiltrate runoff from
this area. URI is a financially independent non-profit partner with Yale University with a long
history of coupling community development with various forms of greening and research-
practice linkages (Murphy-Dunning, 2009; Scanlan et al., 2021). URI also runs New Haven’s
request-driven street tree planting program. Following this initial project, two National Fish &
Wildlife Foundation grants were secured by URI and the Yale School of Environment, in
partnership with the City of New Haven and others, to research performance and experiment
with bioswale design and construction methods. Preliminary data suggest that the soils are
sufficiently able to infiltrate stormwater when needed, and that the monitored bioswales are
largely effective (Benoit personal communication).
Most of the City’s bioswales (~190) were constructed using grant funding. Two grants
were used to construct a majority of the bioswales—a Clean Water Fund (CWF) grant and a
Community Development Block Grant- Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) grant. Each grant’s
objectives stipulated where bioswales could be placed. For example, the CWF grant specified
that bioswales needed to be built in combined sewer watersheds draining to the West River.
There are 3 CSO outfalls that drain to the West River (Figure 1). Potential bioswale sites were
located in all subwatersheds that drain into the West River. Then sites were prioritized starting in
the subwatershed of the CSO with the most overflow events, using monitoring data collected by
GNHWPCA. Overall, 70 bioswales were constructed in these West River CSO sewershed areas
in 2018 and 2019.
The CDBG-DR project was designed to mitigate flooding in the Hill-Downtown
sewershed, a 600 acre sewershed that includes most of Downtown and a portion of the Hill
neighborhood. Planning began in 2014 and was completed in 2017. As the City’s most
impervious sewershed with the oldest sewer infrastructure, this area suffers from insufficient
capacity in the sewer system and therefore flooding during high intensity rain events. As of
2020, over 150 bioswales have already been constructed in this sewershed (Figure 2) with an
additional 75 to be constructed in 2021. Despite the need for restoration and impervious surface
removal within this sewershed, finding locations suitable for bioswales is a persistent challenge.
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 11
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
Infrastructure conflicts such as parking meters, fire hydrants, trees, and above- and below-ground
utilities preclude otherwise viable bioswale locations in the area of need.
4.2 Statistical Analyses
4.2.1 Neighborhood
The three neighborhoods with the highest poverty rates (the Hill, Dwight, and West River) had
statistically significantly more GI than a baseline case of equal distribution by population (Figure
3, Table 1). Edgewood, Downtown, and West River have roughly three times more installations
relative to the population, which is more different than chance alone can explain. Dwight had
6.36 times more GI installations than expected. The odds ratios in the Beaver Hills, Newhallville,
and Dixwell neighborhoods are indistinguishable from chance. Seven neighborhoods have no
Green Stormwater Infrastructure at all. These seven neighborhoods without GSI are all located in
the perimeter of the city, which was developed later and were constructed as separately sewered.
These neighborhoods have younger infrastructure, newer homes, and are more likely to be owner
occupied. Generally, high-poverty, high-impervious surface neighborhoods received more GSI
than lower-poverty, low-impervious surface neighborhoods
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 12
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
Figure 3. Odds ratios for Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI) installations by Neighborhood
and percent impervious surface cover. Neighborhoods are arrayed by highest poverty (top) to
lowest (bottom), horizontal grey lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. The vertical line at 1
indicates even distribution by population.
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 13
Cities a nd the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
Table 1. Socioeconomic descriptive statistics and Green Stormwater Infrastructure installation rates, New Haven, CT 2013 – 2019.
Foreign GSI*
Impervious Total Latinx White African Born per GSI* lower upper
Surface Pop. Pop. Pop. American Pop. Poverty GSI* 1,000 Odds 95% 95%
Neighborhood (%) (2017) (%) (%) Pop. (%) (%) Rate (n) residents Ratio CI CI
Amity 41 5,092 15.9 22.7 51.9 7.1 0.3 1 0.196 0.13 0 0.7
Annex 45 7,280 51.8 26.6 17.7 21.8 0.183 0 0 0 0 0.33
Beaver Hills 37 5,118 18.1 16.4 59.2 13.4 0.135 5 0.977 0.63 0.2 1.46
Dixwell 55 5,006 14.6 16.3 64.2 9.4 0.304 6 1.199 0.77 0.28 1.67
Downtown 67 11,102 12.3 55.3 10.5 22.6 0.249 49 4.414 2.83 2.09 3.74
Dwight 66 3,735 23.3 25.2 39.8 16 0.4 37 9.906 6.36 4.48 8.76
East Rock 42 8,544 11 63.7 9 29.2 0.157 0 0 0 0 0.28
East Shore 29 4,367 9.7 67.3 20.1 8 0.031 0 0 0 0 0.54
Edgewood 43 4,490 11.1 22.7 59.7 7.3 0.24 22 4.9 3.14 1.97 4.76
Fair Haven 58 17,141 66.3 14.9 17.4 17.9 0.301 8 0.467 0.3 0.13 0.59
Fair Haven Heights 28 6,580 47 29.4 21 10 0.218 0 0 0 0 0.36
the Hill 59 15,368 48.2 12.5 34.9 17.4 0.43 47 3.058 1.96 1.44 2.61
Long Wharf 73 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA
Newhallville 43 6,074 14.7 3 81.2 12.7 0.284 7 1.152 0.74 0.3 1.52
Prospect Hill 38 4,559 18.5 34.6 21.2 26.2 0.242 0 0 0 0 0.52
Quinnipiac Meadows 32 6,143 41.1 25.6 27.5 14.2 0.198 0 0 0 0 0.39
West River 34 3,641 27.2 13.4 53.7 13.8 0.368 19 5.218 3.35 2.02 5.23
West Rock 18 4,733 15 43.4 35.6 11.6 0.317 1 0.211 0.14 0 0.76
Westville 21 8,610 10.4 53.4 28.5 15.7 0.107 2 0.232 0.15 0.02 0.54
Wooster Square 62 3,302 22.3 48.5 22.3 13.7 0.264 0 0 0 0 0.72
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 14
Locke et al.: Green Stormw ater Infrastructure Siting
4.2.2 Census Block Groups
Three measures of Green Infrastructure installations were used to associate GI installations with
socioeconomic and demographic data: the number per block group, the per capita installation rate,
and the aforementioned odds ratio. All GSI measures were negatively and significantly correlated
with median household income (Table 2). There were no significant relationships among any of the
GSI variables and race at the block group scale; neither the percent White nor the percent African
American populations were correlated with GSI installation. The percentage of the housing units in a
block group that are owner occupied were significantly and negatively associated with GSI, the
opposite was true for vacant housing units. Educational attainment was also not associated with GSI.
Table 2. Correlations between Green Stormwater Infrastructure installation
statistics and socioeconomic variables. Light gray values have high p-
values and are not statistically significant.
GSI1 per GSI1 Odds
GSI1 (n)
capita Ratio
GSI1 per capita 0.988***
GSI1 Odds Ratio 0.988*** 1.000***
Median Household Income ($) -0.306** -0.328** -0.328**
White Population (%) -0.128 -0.134 -0.134
African American (%) 0.168 0.183 0.183
Owner Occupied (%) -0.353*** -0.349*** -0.349***
Vacant Housing (%) 0.239* 0.247* 0.247*
Educational Attainment2 -0.121 -0.135 -0.135
1 GSI = Green Stormwater Infrastructure.
2 Percentage of those 25 years or older with a high school diploma,
equivalent or greater.
Computed correlation used spearman-method with listwise-deletion.
*** < 0.001, ** < 0.01, * < 0.05,
5 DISCUSSION
Our findings further complicate questions associated with understanding the relationship between
GSI and equity, and the use of distributional analysis of amenities as an index for equity within
spatial analyses of environmental justice. In our case discussion highlighting the historical choices,
constraints, and contemporary priorities shaping the of siting of GSI in New Haven, three distinct
themes emerge that can inform not only the spatial analysis process but also the questions we ask of
the findings. We identify these themes as grant funding; infrastructure conflicts; and prioritization of
technical needs, merits, and choices in planning and siting activities. These themes complicate
distributional analyses and demonstrate the necessity of understanding spatial data in context with
procedural and process-oriented discussions.
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 15
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
In New Haven, grant funding is a determinant of specific projects. For instance, the Clean
Water Fund grant only funded projects within CSO sewershed areas draining to the West River. The
Community Development Block Grant also required the placement of funded projects within a
specific sewershed. The geographically specific requirements of grant funding means that not all
neighborhoods have the same likelihood of containing GSI. From an analytical perspective, this
identified theme poses a methodological problem for the measuring the distribution of GSI: The
baseline reference used here – for comparability to similar prior research - to understand whether
distribution within New Haven’s neighborhoods is equitably distributed set of GSI relative to the
population in a specified geographic area.
The planning narrative reveals that this baseline is not congruent with the on-the-ground
possibilities for GSI siting. There are geographic areas ineligible for GI installation by the funders.
To frame this another way, the grant opportunity makes a totally equitable distribution amongst all
city neighborhoods by population an impossibility. Therefore, utilizing a baseline that accounts for
constraints such as funding priorities of infrastructural development might allow researchers to gain a
hyperlocal understanding of regional distribution. Moreover, the concentration of GSI in the
downtown sewershed points to the need to consider and incorporate other possible evaluative
measures for assessing equity and inequity, such as the contextual information on the siting process
from the practitioners planning, carrying out, and maintain the GSI.
Further, legacy infrastructures, identified by engineers and planners as fixed determinants of
final siting location, demand further attention within accounts of how the location of projects are
determined. Incorporating an approach centered on understanding transgenerational equity can
describe how past and future generations experienced or will experience the benefits and burdens of
infrastructure provision. For instance, were previously constructed infrastructures built with either
discriminatory intent or produced a disparate impact? Understanding the relationships between the
perceived determinants of siting location and their historical impact remains in important part of a
thorough equity analysis. Such analyses have the potential to uncover different matters of concern
across longer-term histories of urban system building. What we see in New Haven is that some areas
of the city received sewer modernization while others did not. The seven neighborhoods without any
GSI were more recently developed and built as separately sewered (Figure 2), have lower poverty
rates (Figure 3), and are more likely to be owner occupied (Table 1). At the neighborhood level GSI,
GSI per capita, and GSI odds ratios are negatively associated with median household income and
owner-occupied housing, and positively correlated with vacant housing. To understand if green
infrastructure is equitable, it is also necessary to understand what investments have been made
elsewhere.
Additionally, we learn in the case that the Downtown sewershed contains GSI because of the
low-lying topography, high impervious surface cover, low sewer capacity, and pressures from sea
level rise all combine and create frequent flooding. GSI was needed to reduce the flooding because it
is not possible to construct enough storm sewer capacity within this area. While these existing
systems are matters of material fact, the existence and absence of particular technological features
and systems may point to prior patterns of uneven development. For instance, researchers may
consider future analyses to understand the patterns of development that led some areas to receive
separated sewer systems while others did not. Figure 2 demonstrates that separated sewers often
correspond to areas with lower rates of poverty. While it is known that separated systems were built
post-1920 in new development areas of the city, it remains unknown what demographic groups
benefited from this shift in technological choice either immediately or in the time since. Additionally,
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 16
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
it is worth considering whether the provisioning of separated sewer systems is coincident with
historically segregationist practices such as redlining, highway building, or zoning.
If GSI is primarily concentrated in areas that were excluded from grey infrastructure
construction or retrofit, it is necessary to examine whether GSI, as a technological choice, can have
just or equitable outcomes. Our case study found that institutional motivations for project siting in
New Haven have little to do with sociodemographic characteristics of the area. This finding
demonstrates that technical needs, merits, and choices weighed heavily in the decision-making
processes involved in location determination. When technical priorities dominate the decision-
making process, distributional equity of siting locations might be a possible outcome. Yet, a
technologically equitable (the installations are distributed within the areas of greatest need) system
might also discount other forms of inequity. Examining the question of how ‘need’ is defined makes
this distinction clear. Indeed, if environmental justice is an intended or proposed outcome associated
with the uptake of GSI, considering how needs are defined across social, ecological, cultural, and
political domains offers one mechanism of encouraging broader systemic transformations. If the
needs of a given region or neighborhood are consistently defined through technical means, the first
step towards just systemic transformations is broadening how and in what context needs are defined.
It was noted in the introduction that often a recipe for environmental justice analyses of
distributional equity includes a fixed harm (or benefit), a set of spatial boundaries, and
socioeconomic and/or demographic data on the people living in those boundaries and nearby (or not)
environmental harms or benefits. This paper has demonstrated that incorporating the process of
locating and allocating GSI informs and refines spatial analyses, and aids in the interpretation of the
results without the a prioi assumption of it serving an environmental good. But a separate issue with
the basic formula pertains to the use of spatial, polygon boundaries. How reflective of the lived
experience of residents are zip codes, Census block groups, or neighborhoods? Dividing geographic
space into polygons such as administrative units or Census block groups, and then aggregating
observations using the so-called “container approach” (Talen and Anselin, 1998) raises separate
issues. Within block group heterogeneity, for example, is implicitly assumed with the consequences
of under- or over-estimated access or exposure (Miyake et al., 2010). The results of any analyses that
use polygons and the container method are further subject to the modifiable areal unit problem (or
MAUP). It is never known how much of the analytical results are attributable to the size, shape, and
configuration of the set of polygons used (Openshaw, 1981). This paper used two sets of polygons –
neighborhoods and Census block groups – to guard against the tradeoffs inherent between fewer,
larger, plausibly more heterogenous neighborhoods that are better known to residents and decision
makers, and the more numerous, smaller Census block groups with greater internal homogeneity. The
quantitative findings were mutually reinforcing across neighborhoods and block groups; greater
confidence can be given to the patterns and relationships found.
6 CONCLUSION
The purpose of this paper was to understand the spatial distribution of GSI in New Haven, CT, from
2013 through 2019, how it relates to the adjacent communities, and the process of how the GSI was
located. Spatial analyses revealed a pattern contrary to the distributional inequity one may have
expected, given similar research in other areas (Baker et al., 2019; Chan and Hopkins, 2017;
McPhillips and Matsler, 2018). On a per person basis, GSI was most often located in the
neighborhoods with the highest poverty rates (Table 1). Moreover, GSI (number), GSI per capita, and
GSI odds ratios were significantly and negatively associated with median household income and
owner-occupied housing, and positively associated with vacant housing at the block group scale
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 17
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
(Table 2). However, the focus on distributional equity (what, where, who) does not meaningfully
engage with the processes and mechanisms that explain how these Green Stormwater Infrastructure
sites were chosen.
A closer look at how GSI was sited revealed few connections, if any, to the socioeconomic
and demographic characteristics of the neighborhoods. Instead, the history of the physical
infrastructure, topography, soils, present-day flooding, and need influenced the location and
allocation. How needs are defined, and by whom, may be important in future research. The creation
of technological systems in urban areas often corresponds to historical patterns of segregation or
other forms of racial or economic exclusion (Grove et al., 2018; Hoffman et al., 2020; Locke et al.,
2021; Namin et al., 2020). If GSI is primarily constructed to retrofit existing systems rather than
build a new, it is of even greater importance to understand this development within context.
This article has demonstrated that the presence of a perceived environmental amenity in terms
of population or geographic context cannot fully address the environmental equity hypothesis based
upon the idea that environmental benefits and burdens associated with green stormwater
infrastructure are distributed fairly in the study area based on local needs, choices, merits, and
motivations. In the case of New Haven, one measure of distributional equity was achieved using a
complete set of GSI installation data. Larger cities and/or cities with more GSI actors may not have
access to a similar census of spatially-explicit GSI installation data. As a consequence the analytical
results could be biased. Missing data of this type may not be at random; organizations with greater
funding and investment in record keeping are more likely to have complete inventories than
organizations that do not have staff and technical capacity for maintaining these kinds of spatial data.
Yet, the narrative case demonstrates how siting constraints and technical priorities shaped this
outcome. An equitable outcome was achieved, but technological equity does not necessarily result in
social equity. Environmental equity and justice as domains of study have consistently demonstrated
the need for localized interventions specific to the social, technological, and landscape contexts of the
study region (Allen, 2018). This paper has shown that the ‘how’ of projects matters just as much as
the ‘where’. As planners, engineers, and municipal officials continue to consider how GSI can amend
environmental harms within local communities, increased attention on past technical choices,
funding constraints, and economic variables can create richer metrics to understand environmental
equity within the localities most impacted by development.
7 LITERATURE CITED
Ahern, J. (2007). “Green infrastructure for cities: The spatial dimension,” in Cities of the Future:
Towards Integrated Sustainable Water and Landscape Management, eds. V. Novotny and P.
Brown (London, UK.: IWA Publishing). doi:10.2166/9781780405308.
Allen, B. L. (2018). Strongly Participatory Science and Knowledge Justice in an Environmentally
Contested Region. Sci. Technol. Hum. Values, 1–25. doi:10.1177/0162243918758380.
Anderton, D. L., Anderson, A. B., Oakes, J. M., and Fraser, M. R. (1994). Environmental Equity:
The Demographics of Dumping. Demography 31, 229–248. doi:10.2307/2061884.
Aragon, T. J. (2020). epitools: Epidemiology Tools. Available at: https://cran.r-
project.org/package=epitools.
Baker, A., Brenneman, E., Chang, H., McPhillips, L., and Matsler, M. (2019). Spatial analysis of
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 18
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
landscape and sociodemographic factors associated with green stormwater infrastructure
distribution in Baltimore, Maryland and Portland, Oregon. Sci. Total Environ. 664, 461–473.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.01.417.
Baltimore City Department of Public Works (2017). Baltimore City MS4 Annual Report.
BenDor, T. K., Shandas, V., Miles, B., Belt, K., and Olander, L. (2018). Ecosystem services and U.S.
stormwater planning: An approach for improving urban stormwater decisions. Environ. Sci.
Policy 88, 92–103. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.06.006.
Benedict, M. A., and McMahon, E. T. (2001). Green Infrastructure: Smart Conservation for the 21st
Century. Washington, D.C.: Sprawl Watch Clearning House Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/info/pubs/docs/greeninfrastructure.pdf.
Bocking, S. (2004). Nature’s Experts: Science, Politics, and the Environment. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
Boone, C. G., Buckley, G. L., Grove, J. M., and Sister, C. (2009). Parks and people: An
environmental justice inquiry in Baltimore, Maryland. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 99, 767–787.
doi:10.1080/00045600903102949.
Chakraborty, J., Maantay, J. A., and Brender, J. D. (2011). Disproportionate proximity to
environmental health hazards: Methods, models, and measurement. Am. J. Public Health 101,
27–36. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2010.300109.
Chan, A. Y., and Hopkins, K. G. (2017). Associations between Sociodemographics and Green
Infrastructure Placement in Portland, Oregon. J. Sustain. Water Built Environ. 3, 05017002.
doi:10.1061/JSWBAY.0000827.
Commission for Racial Justice (1987). Toxic Wastes and Race in The United States: A National
Report on the Racial and Socioeconomic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste
Sites. doi:10.4324/9780429303661-2.
Coutts, C., and Hahn, M. (2015). Green infrastructure, ecosystem services, and human health. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health 12, 9768–9798. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120809768.
Crompton, J. L. (2001). The Impact of Parks on Property Values: A Review of the Empirical
Evidence. J. Leis. Res. 33, 1–31. doi:10.1080/00222216.2001.11949928.
Downey, L. (2005). Assessing Environmental Inequality: How the Conclusions We Draw May Vary
According to the Definitions We Employ. 25, 349–369. doi:10.1038/jid.2014.371.
Finewood, M. H. (2016). Green Infrastructure, Grey Epistemologies, and the Urban Political Ecology
of Pittsburgh’s Water Governance. Antipode 48, 1000–1021. doi:10.1111/anti.12238.
Finewood, M. H., Matsler, A. M., and Zivkovich, J. (2019). Green Infrastructure and the Hidden
Politics of Urban Stormwater Governance in a Postindustrial City. Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr. 109,
909–925. doi:10.1080/24694452.2018.1507813.
Frickel, S. (2008). On Missing New Orleans: Lost Knowledge and Knowledge Gaps in an Urban
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 19
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
Hazardscape. Environ. Hist. Durh. N. C. 12, 643–650. doi:10.1016/j.rpor.2013.01.001.
Frickel, S., and Elliott, J. R. (2008). Tracking industrial land use conversions: A new approach for
studying relict waste and urban development. Organ. Environ. 21, 128–147.
doi:10.1177/1086026608317799.
Giles-Corti, B., Broomhall, M. H., Knuiman, M., Collins, C., Douglas, K., Ng, K., et al. (2005).
Increasing walking: how important is distance to, attractiveness, and size of public open space?
Am. J. Prev. Med. 28, 169–176. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2004.10.018.
Grabowski, Z.J., McPhearson, T., Matlser, A.M., Groffman, P., Pickett, S. T. . What is Green
Infrastructure? A study of definitions in US city planning. Front. Ecol. Environ.
Greater New Haven WPCA (2021). GNHWPCA. Home. Available at: https://gnhwpca.com/
[Accessed February 27, 2021].
Greenworks Philadelphia (2009). Available at: https://beta.phila.gov/media/20160419140515/2009-
greenworks-vision.pdf.
Grove, J. M., Ogden, L., Pickett, S., Boone, C. G., Buckley, G. L., Locke, D. H., et al. (2018). The
Legacy Effect: Understanding How Segregation and Environmental Injustice Unfold over Time
in Baltimore. Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr. 108, 524–537. doi:10.1080/24694452.2017.1365585.
Hoffman, J. S., Shandas, V., and Pendleton, N. (2020). The effects of historical housing policies on
resident exposure to intra-urban heat: A study of 108 US urban areas. Climate 8, 12.
doi:10.3390/cli8010012.
Holifield, R. (2001). Defining environmental justice and environmental racism. Urban Geogr. 22,
78–90. doi:10.2747/0272-3638.22.1.78.
Holifield, R., Chakraborty, J., and Walker, G. (2017). “Methods in environmental justice research,”
in The Routledge handbook of environmental justice (Routledge).
Hurley, A. (1997). Fiasco at Wagner Electric: Environmental Justice and Urban Geography in St.
Louis. Environ. Hist. Durh. N. C. 2, 460–481.
Landry, S. M., and Chakraborty, J. (2009). Street trees and equity: Evaluating the spatial distribution
of an urban amenity. Environ. Plan. A 41, 2651–2670. doi:10.1068/a41236.
Light, J. S. (2009). The Nature of Cities: Ecological Visions and the American Urban Profession,
1920-1960. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Locke, D. H. (2021). Green stormwater infrastructure in New Haven, CT and socioeconomic
variables within neighborhoods and census block groups. Fort Collins, CO: Forest Service
Research Data Archive. https://doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2021-0104
Locke, D. H., Hall, B., Grove, J. M., Pickett, S., Ogden, L., Aoki, C., et al. (2021). Residential
housing segregation and urban tree canopy in 37 US Cities. npj Urban Sustain.
doi:10.1038/s42949-021-00022-0.
Lyytimäki, J., and Sipilä, M. (2009). Hopping on one leg - The challenge of ecosystem disservices
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 20
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
for urban green management. Urban For. Urban Green. 8, 309–315.
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2009.09.003.
McPhillips, L. E., and Matsler, A. M. (2018). Temporal evolution of green stormwater infrastructure
strategies in three US cities. Front. Built Environ. 4, 1–14. doi:10.3389/fbuil.2018.00026.
Mell, I. (2009). Can green infrastructure promote urban sustainability? Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. - Eng.
Sustain. 162, 23–34. doi:10.1680/ensu.2009.162.1.23.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005). Ecosystem and Human Well-Being: Synthesis.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
MillionTrees NYC (2008). Available at: https://www.milliontreesnyc.org/.
Miyake, K. K., Maroko, A. R., Grady, K. L., Maantay, J. a, and Arno, P. S. (2010). Not Just a Walk
in the Park: Methodological Improvements for Determining Environmental Justice Implications
of Park Access in New York City for the Promotion of Physical Activity. Cities Environ. 3, 1–
17. Available at:
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3160641&tool=pmcentrez&renderty
pe=abstract.
Mohai, P., and Saha, R. (2006). Reassessing racial and socioeconomic disparities in environmental
justice research. Demography 43, 383–399. Available at:
http://www.springerlink.com/index/5727158W5R60L137.pdf [Accessed January 31, 2012].
Mohai, P., and Saha, R. (2015). Which came first, people or pollution? Assessing the disparate siting
and post-siting demographic change hypotheses of environmental injustice. Environ. Res. Lett.
10. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/11/115008.
Murphy-Dunning, C. (2009). “From Front Yards to Street Corners: Revitilizing Neighborhoods
through Community-Based Land Stewardship,” in Restorative Commons: Creating Health and
Well-Being through Urban Landscapes, eds. L. K. Campbell and A. Wiesen (Forest Service,
Northern Research Station), 154–163. Available at: http://nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/5149 [Accessed
August 18, 2014].
Namin, S., Xu, W., Zhou, Y., and Beyer, K. (2020). The legacy of the Home Owners’ Loan
Corporation and the political ecology of urban trees and air pollution in the United States. Soc.
Sci. Med. 246. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112758.
NOAA (2020). National Climatic Data Center Data Tools: 1989-2010 normals. Available at:
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/datatools/normals [Accessed February 6, 2020].
Openshaw, S. (1981). “The modifiable areal unit problem,” in Quantitative geography a British view,
60–70. doi:10.2307/2277827.
Pataki, D. E., Carreiro, M. M., Cherrier, J., Grulke, N. E., Jennings, V., Pincetl, S., et al. (2011).
Coupling biogeochemical cycles in urban environments: ecosystem services, green solutions,
and misconceptions. Front. Ecol. Environ. 9, 27–36. doi:10.1890/090220.
Pauleit, S., Hansen, R., Rall, E. L., Zölch, T., Andersson, E., Luz, A. C., et al. (2017). Urban
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 21
Cities and the Environment (CATE), Vol. 14 [2021], Iss. 2, Art. 2
Landscapes and Green Infrastructure. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.23.
Pebesma, E. (2018). Simple features for R: Standardized support for spatial vector data. R J. 10, 439–
446. doi:10.32614/rj-2018-009.
Pellow, D. N. (2007). “Chapter 2,” in Resisting Global Toxics: Transnational Movements For
Environmental Justice (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press), 37–70.
Phillips de Lucas, A. K. (2020). Producing the “Highway to Nowhere”: Social Understandings of
Space in Baltimore, 1944-1974. Engag. Sci. Technol. Soc. 6, 351. doi:10.17351/ests2020.327.
Pulido, L. (2000). Rethinking environmental racism: White privilege and urban development in
Southern California. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 90, 12–40. Available at:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1111/0004-5608.00182 [Accessed February 1, 2012].
Rigolon, A., Browning, M., and Jennings, V. (2018). Inequities in the quality of urban park systems:
An environmental justice investigation of cities in the United States. Landsc. Urban Plan. 178,
156–169. doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.05.026.
Roe, M., and Mell, I. (2013). Negotiating value and priorities: evaluating the demands of green
infrastructure development. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 56, 650–673.
doi:10.1080/09640568.2012.693454.
Roman, L. A., Conway, T. M., Eisenman, T. S., Koeser, A. K., Ordóñez Barona, C., Locke, D. H., et
al. (2021). Beyond ‘trees are good’: Disservices, management costs, and tradeoffs in urban
forestry. Ambio 50, 615–630. doi:10.1007/s13280-020-01396-8.
Scanlan, C., Doroski, D., Murphy-Dunning, C., and Ashton, M. P. (2021). Urban Resources
Initiative: A University Model for Clinical Urban Forestry Education. Arboric. Urban For. 47,
34–50. doi:10.48044/jauf.2021.004.
Sgroi, T., Kirkland, B., and Greater New Haven WPCA (2015). Green Redevelopment Reduces
CSOs in New Haven. in Available at: https://gnhwpca.com/combined-sewer-overflow-
documents/.
Talen, E., and Anselin, L. (1998). Assessing spatial equity: An evaluation of measures of
accessibility to public playgrounds. Environ. Plan. A 30, 595–613. doi:10.1068/a300595.
Taquino, M., Parisi, D., and Gill, D. A. (2002). Units of analysis and the environmental justice
hypothesis: The case of industrial hog farms. Soc. Sci. Q. 83, 298–316. doi:10.1111/1540-
6237.00084.
Tarr, J. A. (1996). The Search for the Ultimate Sink: Urban Pollution in a Historical Perspective.
Akron, Ohio: University of Akron Press.
Tzoulas, K., Korpela, K., Venn, S., Yli-Pelkonen, V., Kaźmierczak, A., Niemela, J., et al. (2007).
Promoting ecosystem and human health in urban areas using Green Infrastructure: A literature
review. Landsc. Urban Plan. 81, 167–178. doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2007.02.001.
United States Census Bureau QuickFacts: New Haven city, Connecticut. Available at:
https://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol14/iss2/2
DOI: 10.15365/cate.2021.140202 22
Locke et al.: Green Stormwater Infrastructure Siting
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/newhavencityconnecticut.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (2011). Evaluation of Urban Soils: Suitability
for green infrastructure or Urban Agriculture. 64, 26. doi:10.1007/s11199-011-0005-6.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (2020). What is Green Infrastructure?
Available at: https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure/what-green-infrastructure [Accessed
September 28, 2020].
Walker, K. (2020). tidycensus: Load US Census Boundary and Attribute Data as “tidyverse” and
’sf’-Ready Data Frames. Available at: https://cran.r-project.org/package=tidycensus.
Winner, L. (1980). Do artifacts have politics? Daedalus 109, 121–136. doi:10.4324/9781315259697-
21.
Published by Digital Commons at Loyola Marymount University and Loyola Law School, 2021 23