PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY COMMUNITY BENEFITS FUND (PCEF)
GRANTS COMMITTEE MEETING MINUTES
December 15, 2022 • 6:00 PM – 8:30 PM
Hybrid Meeting—Zoom Call & PCC Southeast Campus Community Hall
Committee Members Position Affiliation Present
Dr. Megan Horst Co-Chair Associate Professor, School of Yes
Urban Studies & Planning at
Portland State University
Ranfis Villatoro Co-Chair Oregon State Policy Manager, Yes
BlueGreen Alliance
Shanice Brittany Clarke Member-at-Large Director of Community No
Engagement, Portland Public
Schools
Faith Graham Member-at-Large Principal Director, West Coast Yes
Strategy and Development,
Elevate Energy
Maria Gabrielle Sipin Member-at-Large Technical Assistance Manager, Yes
Safe Routes Partnership
Michael Edden Hill Member-at-Large Community Member Yes
Robin Wang Member-at-Large Vibrant Future LLC Yes
Sam Baraso Program Manager PCEF Yes
Cady Lister Deputy Program Director PCEF Yes
Jaimes Valdez Org. Development & PCEF Yes
Policy Manger
Kris Grube Program Manager PCEF No
Mika Barrett Project Manager PCEF No
Jay Richmond Staff PCEF No
Rachel Gilmore Staff PCEF Yes
Wendy Kelfkin Clean Energy Project PCEF Yes
Manager
Tracy M. Smith Facilitator Inhance LLC Yes
Camerina Galván Notetaker Galvan Consulting LLC Yes
OTHER ATTENDEES: Ciara Pressler, Pregame; Elizabeth Trover; June Reyes, Community Outreach
Coordinator, City of Portland; Kyle Diesner, Climate Policy Analyst, Bureau of Planning and Sustainability;
Chris Rhoads; Jenni Hall, Energy Trust of Oregon, Solar Program; Jeff Lane, Development and Finance
Manager, HomeForward; Jill Chen, Portland Housing Bureau; Gayle Palmer, East Portland Resilience
Coalition; Cathy Tuttle, BikeLoud PDX.
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 1 of 7
INTRODUCTIONS
• Tracy M. Smith called the meeting to order at 6:05 PM.
• The quorum was met.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
• Cathy Tuttle is delighted PCEF will be looking at transportation as part of its climate action because
at least 40% of Portlanders cannot drive due to poverty, disability, or age.
• Jeff Lane would like to secure PCEF funding and is pleased PCEF is linking affordable housing and
sustainability goals. Portland Housing Bureau (PHB), Oregon Housing and Community Services, and
Metro have aligned green building standards with their funding sources. Jeff Lane asked if PCEF
would align its dollars with the same standards. Differences in standards lead to costly design
changes.
TIMELINE UPDATE: CIARA PRESSLER, PREGAME, AND SAM BARASO, PCEF
• Ciara Pressler updated the Climate Investment Plan (CIP) development timeline by outlining all the
steps to create a draft of each program and the dates for the committee to expect briefings, either
in small groups or in committee meetings.
ACTION ITEM: Ciara Pressler will email the updated timeline to the committee members.
-
• Committee Member questions and comments:
Can you clarify admin rulemaking? What does that entail for us specifically?
-
Answer: In January 2023, the phases of admin rulemaking will be outlined, and training will be
defined to develop an admin rule package. The PCEF staff will share a rough outline in January,
and the committee will have a full discussion in April 2023.
When will we discuss the community experiencing a disability? Is this part of admin rulemaking?
-
Answer: There will be many ways to address accessibility and the needs of the community
experiencing a disability through the CIP's development.
Where does RFP #3 fit in the timeline?
-
Answer: The roundtable conversations will inform what is appropriate for community-
responsive grants and strategic programs to address. RFP #3 will evolve throughout the
development of CIP. Its allocation and description will be part of CIP, which will be
recommended and approved by the City Council before its release in Fall 2023.
ACTION ITEM: PCEF staff will bring clarity through visuals to explain how the pieces fit together.
-
• Sam Baraso shared the six funding priorities that will take shape during CIP and the funding for two
fast-tracked, approved strategic programs. The development of CIP is occurring concurrently with
the launch of the two programs. The committee will receive briefings on the development of both
tracks to provide input and feedback. Between June 2023 and July 2023, the entirety of CIP will be
shared with the committee to make their full deliberation. The committee will make a formal
recommendation in July 2023, and City Council will approve it in September 2023. RFP #3 will be
rolled out in the early fall.
• Committee Member questions and comments:
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 2 of 7
Is this viable? It feels tight between when City Council will approve and the launch of RFP #3.
-
Answer: RFP #3 will be prepared between the committee's recommendation and City Council's
approval. The expectation is to stay on schedule due to the high interest in RFP #3.
UPDATE: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT UPDATE ON CLIMATE INVESTMENT PLAN (CIP): JUNE REYES,
CITY OF PORTLAND
• June Reyes updated on the Kick-Off event. The event presentation slides and recording can be found
on the event webpage. An accessibility survey was launched and closed on 1/4/2023. Applications
for the topic roundtables will be launched on 12/16/2022.
• June Reyes shared the zoom polls. Eighty-three people attended. Half of the attendees were from
nonprofits and consultants. A dozen were community members. Many were interested in what CIP
is, how they can provide input and the funding priorities. People were generally satisfied with the
event.
• Committee members are invited to attend upcoming events.
• June Reyes asked the committee members what they were interested in hearing about at the
monthly meetings. Committee member's questions and comments:
What is the purpose of the roundtable application?
-
Answer: The application is to be part of the 8-person round table to bring a diverse perspective
to write a robust and thoughtful CIP draft.
Will the committee receive written feedback from people attending the engagement events to
-
see how the events are going? The committee doesn't need to discuss the feedback.
Answer: Many notes from the event can be shared with the committee.
ACTION ITEM: June Reyes will share the notes from the Kick-Off Meeting with the committee
-
members.
Was the race, age, or other demographic information of the Kick-Off event attendees captured?
-
Answer: Demographic information was not collected for the Kick-Off event. It was an open
invitation with targeted outreach. The accessibility survey will capture demographic information
about living with a disability, race, birth year, and more.
Can the committee members participate in the roundtable?
-
Answer: Committee members can participate in the roundtable to bring their expertise to a
specific topic.
A committee member would like to know the demographics of the individuals participating in
-
the events and the type of organizations participating in general and targeted events. They
would like to know if the organizations reflect the PCEF priority populations. If not, what can be
done to address this?
A question was asked during the Kick-Off event regarding having more inclusive and accessible
-
meetings by making the materials less technical and making CIP material easier to connect with.
Which engagement events will be designed more intentionally, so they are easier to understand
for people under 30 and youth? Which meetings can be restructured to get the best quality
input from people we usually don't engage with?
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 3 of 7
Answer: This can be implemented during the Community Vision and Priorities Phase in the
community engagement plan. The events can be made more accessible along the way. There is
still a lot to think about regarding how the preliminary draft section and the full job proposal
comment can be more inclusive. The efforts should connect back to PCEF priorities.
PRESENTATION: PORTLAND'S 2020 CARBON EMISSIONS AND PATHWAY ANALYSIS: KYLE DIESNER,
BUREAU OF PLANNING AND SUSTAINABILITY
• The Bureau of Planning and Sustainability adopted a Climate Emergency Workplan (CEW) in June
2022. The plan addresses the Climate Crisis Declaration adopted in 2020 and pares with PCEF.
• Kyle Diesner presented data on carbon emissions overview for 2020 by sector-based emissions data
or consumption-based emissions. These are emissions produced in the city. Kyle Diesner shared the
Portland Decarbonization Pathways Tool and Analysis, which informs CEW's decarbonization
priorities. It will require a cumulative stacking of actions to reach net zero by 2050.
• Committee member questions:
Between private, community, and government, what is the approximate figure for a dollar
-
investment to meet the 2030 goal of 50-60%?
Answer: No, we have not quantified the cost of hitting these targets largely because the model
isn't prescriptive of the path to reach the goal. Some of the action metrics in the tool do address
cost for some strategies, particularly around low-income household costs. We have not looked
at the overall cost of hitting the target.
How do you plan to offset the increasing cost of transportation for the working class and the
-
poor?
Answer: PBOT convened a committee to look at pricing for equitable mobility. They are charged
with determining how to price transportation in a way that will return dollars to the
communities that can least afford price increases. The committee's findings and
recommendations can be found in a report on PBOT's website.
Can you name the institutional barriers and the key agencies, people, and institutions outside
-
PCEF that have the greatest influence on change? It would help the community and me know
who the actors are. Can you name the institutions and agencies we should push this charge to?
Answer: Energy Trust of Oregon is key for the building sector and the grid. PFEC can push that
-
work further. Significant federal dollars are coming from bills passed in the past year. How we
invest and prioritize those dollars will be a big piece. Regarding transportation, PBOT, Metro,
and ODOT are coordinated and have dollars for infrastructure, but none have dollars to help
community members change behaviors and hit the targets. The dollars PCEF invests in changing
behaviors will be important. Hopefully, there will be greater electric vehicle (EV) incentives in
the coming years. Transportation emissions are hard to drive down because no one agency is
dedicated to doing so. It will require the coordination of community action, government policy,
and government investments to get to net zero.
A committee member responded that the state has resources and has decided to invest them in
-
some areas and not others. It will take the coordination of many people that aligns with how
resources are spent and how the state has generated revenue.
The last time Kyle Diesner presented, he shared that high-income households consume and
-
produce more greenhouse emissions. Do you have an update on the data?
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 4 of 7
Answer: There is no new data because the model has not been updated since the last
presentation. We will be working on that soon. Initiatives need to be developed with the
understanding that low-income households are not driving carbon emissions.
ACTION ITEM: Kyle Diesner will share updated data on high-income household consumption
-
and emissions with the committee.
The carbon intensity of the grid will take time to come down. With limited PCEF transportation
-
dollars, we should not invest in EVs but rather in land use changes and walking and biking
infrastructure. I want to see less focus on EVs in general.
ACTION ITEM: The committee will revisit a discussion about transportation.
-
To reach sequestration goals, we need a lot of trees. How many trees can be planted within
-
Portland to meet the goals? Does regenerative agriculture play a role inside and outside
Portland? What about green infrastructures, such as green roofs and de-paving?
Answer: We don't have a model that looks at the benefits of eco-room and regenerative
agriculture. We can only look at tree planning. The tool looks at the available open space for
tree planting within Multnomah County. We will need other sources of sequestration.
Based on the data and models, where would you prioritize? What is the biggest bang for the
-
buck?
Answer: That question is for the committee. Kyle Diesner has had conversations with the PCEF
staff to inform the work. The allocations approved by City Council are aligned with the work.
Kyle Diesner was not prepared to weigh in on the strategies.
CLIMATE INVESTMENT PLAN FUNDING INITIATIVE TEMPLATE: JAIMES VALDEZ, PCEF
• The template will be discussed at a later time.
ACTION ITEM: PCEF staff will email the CIP funding initiative template to the committee.
-
REGULATED MULTI-FAMILY AFFORDABLE HOUSING: CADY LISTER, PCEF, AND JILL CHEN, PHB
• Cady Lister presented data on Portland's affordable renter housing and unhoused, the cost burden
on renters and homeowners, affordable rental housing units, and funding. She overviewed the
multi-family affordable housing program in partnership with the PHB. The program will be
implemented in phases. Some projects already underway will close in Phase I, and others may close
after Phase I. She shared Phase I and Phase II characteristics.
ACTION ITEM: The timeline listing known projects that may close in the phase 1 timeframe will
-
be shared with the committee members.
• Committee member questions and input:
To what extent will the community be engaged in refining or defining eligible expenses?
-
Answer: An intergovernmental agreement with PHB is underway, so the financial closing for
-
Phase I projects will be in January 2023. There are no opportunities for community engagement
because the projects are far along in their design and development. The intent is to increase
comfort and reduce carbon in the units.
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 5 of 7
Jill Chen added that the projects have already been vetted and recommended by a Community
Review Committee in addition to the developer doing community engagement and outreach.
The projects have gone through Portland processes as well.
Is EV charging a priority for people living in low-income housing?
-
Answer: It is a requirement in all the buildings to be EV ready. Most buildings won't have EV
charging stations unless an entity like PCEF intervenes.
If it is required, then why is PCEF funding it? It should be part of the overall construction budget
-
if required.
Answer: To push the PCEF goals, we ask developers to go above code. The requirement is that
units be EV ready, but the equipment doesn't need to be installed. There is interest in car
sharing and getting low-income households into EVs to lower costs.
ACTION ITEM: Cady Lister will share with the additional committee information, such as surveys,
-
and post them on the website.
A committee member would like to see community engagement in Phase 2.
-
Will parking minimum requirements be eliminated from the developments underway? What
-
does vehicle accommodation look like at the properties?
Answer: The parking depends on the project. PHB has seen that the further you go from the city
core, the housing developers have included parking even when parking is not required.
Under the oversight and monitoring category, it states PCEF will review and approve. Can you
-
clarify if that is PCEF staff, PCEF committee, or both?
Answer: PCEF staff will look at the proposed measures for each project. PBH has a team that will
provide oversight and collaborates with PCEF staff.
Now is the time to improve the quality of homes on the market for 100 years. Can you give
-
examples of what is possible to add to the scope of a project closing in January 2023?
Answer: Jill Chen shared as an example Alder 9. It is a high-rise and, therefore, not required to
have AC, but vulnerable populations need cooling systems. PHB has asked the developers to add
mini splits on the upper floors where the high at-risk units are located. PBH and PCEF must reach
an agreement by March 2023, so the developers can order the materials. It's a go or no-go.
ACTION ITEM: PCEF staff and Jill Chen will share additional examples with the committee of
-
what is possible to add to the scope of a project that is closing in January 2023.
ACTION ITEM: Cady Lister will respond and follow up with a committee member regarding her
-
questions:
On the slide that shows PHB wages, do we know how that compares to PCEF?
-
On oversight and monitoring, does that mean PCEF program metrics?
-
Does compliance include asking if the residents are happy, whether they are using it, and
-
their energy usage?
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 6 of 7
REPORT: 12/8 ACEEE CONFERENCE ON INFLATION REDUCTION ACT: ROBIN WANG, COMMITTEE
MEMBER, AND JAIMES VALDEZ, PCEF.
• Robin Wang and Jaimes Valdez attended the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
(ACEEE) Conference and provided the following highlights:
PCEF will be the dominant public source for climate justice funding in Portland despite imminent
-
IRA funding. PCEF should align with IRA initiatives but not wait for the IRA to define the rules of
fund allocations. There are parallels between IRA and PCEF. PCEF is leading the work nationally.
As CIP is developed, PCEF should work with economists, conveners, and industry leaders on how
-
best to accommodate and mitigate supply and capacity chain challenges that will happen.
Investments may be nullified by overlooking education, training, and awareness.
-
There are opportunities for decarbonization, jobs, and innovation with the federal funds
-
coming. The tax credits will be rolled out on 1/1/2023. It will take time for the federal
government to roll out income-based and equity programs such as incentives and rebates. Some
of these require states to set up incentives and rebate programs. Jaimes Valdez will work with
local and state partners to ensure programs are aligned with PCEF and other funding sources.
THE MEETING WAS ADJOURNED AT 8:03 PM.
NEXT MEETING: The next hybrid meeting will be Thursday, January 19, 2023, 6:00 PM—8:00 PM
Submitted by Camerina Galván, Notetaker, Galvan Consulting LLC.
12/15/2022 PCEF Grant Committee Meeting Minutes Page 7 of 7