Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Oct 14, 2018 · Page B2
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159236507/
82 SUNDAY. OCTOBER 14, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Nuanced solutions lost
in partisan rift
Much of our political debate, from local
on line commentary to congressional LEiS
soundbites. Is presented as extreme binary TAU<
choices. For example. you can choose to
open America to more imm.igrants and ~
refugees. or you can care about protect· "TI-\E:
ing America from terrorists and MS-13.Y ou 11-ME=.TCV
can aid the homeless, or keep our neighbor
hoods clean and safe. If you are seen as sup• MoVE:MEN'f.
porting one objective, you obviously don't
support the other whatsoever.
Who sets up these choices? What If It's
both/and, not either/or?
Granted, not all opinions are morally or
logically equivalent or deserving of equal
consideration. But many choices presented
this way aren't mutually exclusive, and this
typeofthinkinggets us nowhere. We are
actually capable of pursuing more than one
objective at a time, and doing so in ways
that are humane, compassionate, account
able, effective, nuanced and sustainable
beyond partisan whims. I know that sounds
!Ike the Holy Grall of public policy, and
it will never be perfect. Frankly, we can't
expect that from any sector - public, pri
vate, nonprofit or combinations thereof. So SHENEMAN""""""'"'"'"'"
when failure happens, let's do better at eval 2018P RE-MIDTERPMAR TISAMNA P
uating it and trying new things, rather than
getting defensive of the status quo or imme
diately calling for it all to be scuttled.
This approach is harder work than
smugly attacking straw men, whether from
the Senate floor or behind a keyboard. But
how often does "easy" really point to the
best choice?
Shannon Mickelson Campbell,
Somlleast Portland
Portland's booming
homelessness industry
Now Portland State University Is getting
in on the homeless boom ("Portland State
invests $3 million to research homeless
ness, 'smart cities'," Oct.!). Homelessness in
Portland has become its own Industry. Next ■-KANYE
come government grants to study the prob·
!em. But nobody will even identify the prob· ■-TAYLOR
lem, let alone solve it. ..
Separating the truly needy from the ....
deadbeats sucking the system down is the •
problem. Identifying the truly needy is not a
hard task. They are the people who, through
no fault of their own have found themselves
with no place to go. This category includes
families and children who do not have the If you believe we need to act - not just
means to retain or gain adequate shelter. Vote with intention More action, less talking- vote talk about our desire to address climate dis
Also included are those who do not have 'yes' for Clean Energy Initiative ruption and its impact on vulnerable com
the mental or physical capacity to main- I think we all realize how important this mu.nities- join me in voting "yes" on Mea
tain shelter. The solution to homelessness next election is- in Oregon and in the Mayor Ted Wheeler's Oct. 3 guest opin· sure 26-201. I hope Portland's mayor will, too.
should be focused here. country at large. We need action on climate ion, "Portland will keep paving the way for
The problem for everyone else loose on change. We need support for universal health action on climate change," describes his Virginia Tarango, Somlteast Portiand
the streets is they are abusers of drugs, alco care and education. We need to come together commitment to fight climate disruption
hol or both. Or they could just be too lazy as a state and country to solve the enormous while paying attention to underserved com City Club members, not
to work. These people are catered to in the problems facing us in the 21st Century. munities. He points out Portland took the board, should set policy
form of free handouts and having the City of We need to vote our values in a practi- lead 25 years ago to become the first U.S.
Portland clean up their messes. The city is cal way. Ask which candidates will address city to adopt a climate action plan. ln response to recent opinions regard
the enabler for the alcohol and drug users. those issues without putting their heads in Passing the Portland Clean Energy lni· ing the City Club of Portland, I agree with
Jobs are plentiful. Make these people at the ideological sand or voting consistently at tiative, Measure 26-201, will create a fund Ed Hershey's comments ("The sad decline
least work for their shelter. They can clean the behest of their corporate funders. Which with a specific purpose, to do all the things of Portland's City Club at the worst possible
up the streets, parks and other public areas. candidates come and talk to us, the voters? Wheeler wants to accomplish. The fund time,"Oct. 7).
Until then, all the studies in the world I'm voting Democrat myself. Remember, created will be used specifically to ben- The City Club's mission statement is:
will not get one person off the street. Bur in the2016 election, only 43 percent of the efit underserved communities, provide "To inform its members and the com
then, I am not convinced politicians want to eligible voting population turned out. lfyou job training and more. It will fund clean munity In public matters and to arouse
eliminate homelessness. You get more of the don't want to be ruled by a minority, paid energy projects that could allow us to meet in them a realization of the obligations
behavior you reward. for by an elite, please vote. goals in the city's climate action plan- the of citizenship." Current City Club staff,
very plan Wheeler chose to spotlight in his most of whom have been there barely a
Jay Bacon, Boring Tod Davies, Ashland column. year or less, along with recent and current
Share your opinion
Letters: Limit to 250 words and submit to letters@oregonlan.com. Commentaries: Submit 600-800 words to commentary@oregonian.com. Include your home address and phone number for verification.
Submissions may also be malled to Oregonian Opinlon.1500 SW First Ave. . Suite 400, Portland, OR 97201. All submissions become the property of The Oregonian and will not be returned. Submissions may be
edited and may be publishedo r otherwiseu sed in any medium.R eache ditor LauraG undersona t 503-221-8378o r lgunderson@oregonian.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.