Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Sep 30, 2018 · Page A9
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159237875/
THE OREGONIAN SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 2018 A9
ELECTION 2018 METRO AREA
Big money pours into fight Learn tips and tricks
for getting public documents
overW ashingtonc arbonf ee Getting a firsthand look at documents that are often
hidden from public view in state, local and federal agen·
cies can be fascinating- and difficult.
Oregon's first state-appointed public records advocate,
Ginger McCall. ls offering two public trainings In October
Phuong Le Associated Press on how to effectively use the stare·s public record law.
The classes will cover drafting a request for records,
A campaign bankrolled by the oil industry has raised The initiative would also set up a lS•member public over• fees an agency might ask you to pay, exemptions the gov
S20.46m illion to defeat a carbon pollution fee on Lheb allot sight board made up of governor appointees and state offi· ernment might cite and your rights to an appeal.
in Washington state aiming at tackling climate change. cials, to supervise the spending. The training sessions will be held:
The money raised so far by the "No on 1631"c ampaign Critics say the board, with only one elected official, > 5:30 p.m. Oct. 8, Milwaukie City Hall, 1on2 S.E. Main St.
sponsored by che Western States Petroleum Association, an would have too much authority to spend billions of dollars It will also stream on the city of Milwaukie's YouTube
oil industry trade group, puts it near the cop In fundralslng on programs without accountability if emissions reduction channel: blt.ly/2DFIAH7
efforts by a statewide initiative campaign in Washington, targets are not met. ► 5:30 p.m. Oct. IS, Portland Archives & Records Center,
according to a review of state campaign finance data. Carlyle said the board's structure is in line with other 1800 S.W.6 th Ave. #550
The state record of S22.45 million was set in 2013 by the state boards and commissions and the legislature ulti· To register, contact Mccall at ginger.mccall@oregon,
..N o on 522" committee which successfully defeated a bal mately has appropriations authority. gov. Classes are limited. - TheOregonla11/0rego11Llvt
lot measure requiring labels on food with genetically engi
neered ingredients.
If approved by voters Nov. 6, Initiative 1631w ould make
Washington the first state In the U.S. to Impose a direct car
bon fee or tax by voter initiative.
The initiative would charge large carbon emitters fees on
fossil fuels used or sold In the state or electricity generated
within the state. The fees would raise an estimated $2.3 bil
lion in the first five years to fund a wide range of programs
intended to cut greenhouse gas emissions.
Oil companies have given the bulk of opposition money,
with Phllllps 66 the cop donor at $7.2 mllllon.
NThisc ostly and nawed initiative would create damaging
policies for our state and unfairly hurt Washington's fami
lies, small businesses and our economy," said Dennis Nuss,
a spokesman with Phillips 66, which operates an oil refinery
In Ferndale.
State Sen. Reuven Carlyle, a Seattle Democrat who span·
sored a carbon tax bill In the most recent session, said big
oil companies are trying to stop any momentum on car
bon-pricing in the U.S.
Supporters of the measure have raised $6.1 million. The
Narure Conservancy is the top donor giving Sl million in
cash.
Proponents have run ads saying the initiative will hold
polluters who have harmed people's health responsible and
Invests the money in clean energy, clean water and other
projects.
Meanwhile, an opposition TV ad warns that the mea
sure unfairly exempts many of the state's largest polluters,
including the state's only coal-fired power plant, steel mills
and aviation fuels- and claims that smaller businesses and
consumers are left with the burden.
The measure comes two years after Washington voters
rejected a carbon tax that would have been the first in the
nation.
The escalating fees would start in 2020 at $15 per metric
e to a n c h o g f a c l a l r o b n o n o f g em as i o s l s i i n o e n s s , o l a d d . d T i h n e g f a e n e s e i s n t c im re a a t s e e d $2 1 4 e a c c e h n t y s ea to r A ROOF YOU CAN RELY ON
plus inflation and continues until the state meets goals to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Then it would only adjust
for inflation. FOR THE NEXT 50 YEARS
FROM THE COMPANY YOU'VE TRUSTED FOR THE PAST 70
14-MONTH CD SPECIAL
• GAF'S LIFETIME ROOFING SYSTEM with SO-year warranty means peace of mind
2.50?;§
• EXPERIENCED CREWS meet tough GAF & Neil Kelly installation standards
• WE PUT IN THE EXTRA WORK to ensure proper ventilation & humidity control
SCHEDULE A ROOF REPLACEMENT BY OCT. 31, 2018 AND RECEIVE:
UP TO $2,500 OFF ON ROOF
947S W BroadwayP,o rtland,( 503)5 25-8800 REPLACEMENT*
For rhe location nearest you,
•save $25 per 100 ft. sq. on a GAF Lifetime Roofing System.
please call (855)8 86-4824o r visiru s at
hrstrcpublic.com YEARS OF
\t BUILDING
INTEGRITY
FIRST REPUBLIC BANK
ROOFS THAT neilkelly.com/roofing
Annua PercentageY<>lde'lectV€asofpubl,cat,0<1dat<> RISE ABOVE 503.395.0411
LJm,•e(l t me offer sutiiect to change w,thou1 notice $\0 000 mm mum
balancePenal1yf0r"a•lyw1lhd•a-,valf~smay•educeearrngs
Consume, a,ccour1s only Offer canoo• be ccmb,rC'<l w th
OlhE-<p romCh(lflS Membf= f01C
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.