Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Aug 8, 2018 · Page A20
by< ½a,In cestry·
Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1223639843/
A20 WEDNESDAY. AUGUST 8. 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR to or is unable to keep and raise a child -
adoption being the most obvious. A few
Why is racism at home months of interruption co her life is all that
in Portland? is necessary to solve an unwanted preg
nancy and to give life rather than ending It.
The evening beforet he Patriot Prayer
rally. I ran the waterfront loop to feel a sense Linda Chaney, Happy Valley
of shared rights to a public space. I felt com
pelled to assert the waterfront was mine No red flags for stockpiling guns?
to enjoy as anyone elsew ould. l receiveda
challenge to that sense of belonging when After reading the Aug. 3 report "Shooter
I turned a corner near the Steel Bridge. A who killed 58 in Las Vegas burned through
white man saw me, saw my brown skin, and cash. amassed guns before rampage," It's
brandished a leather holder for his knife. J still unbelievable to me that one individ·
continued runningand receivedu nwelcom ual could make multiple purchasesa nd
ing and unwavering stares from other white accumulate dozens of assault style weap
folks along the walkway. A commitment to ons, large capacity magazines and several
establishing my presence was drowned by hundred rounds of ammunition with no red
fear, and I left with haste. flagsg oingu p. As horrific as this massacre
I would find it easierto rejectthis racial· was, just imagine how much worse it could
ly-motlvated threat if the Pacific Northwest be If shooter Stephen Paddock had been pro
was not so apathetic coward subtler forms of curing this arsenal to arm a terrorist cell,
racism- from workplaced ynamics,t o hous putting dozenso f weaponsi n the hands of
ing access, appropriation and a sheer lack dozenso f terroristsa t the same time.
of neighborliness. Yet the deafening silence
abouts ystemicr acisma llowse xtreme mani John Kranda, Southwest Portland
festationso f white supremacyt o inflict more
pain because it makes me question whether I Don't forget Outer Space Treaty
have a community behind me.
In light of the rally and my own experi Please,i n articles mentioning President
ence. l ask readerst o reckonw ith the fol Donald Trump's desiret o "ensureA mer-
lowing, not only today, but also moving ican dominance in space,"c ould you also
forward: Why has white supremacy found report the fact that this mes In the face of the
its home here? Why does Portland profess a Outer Space Treaty of 1967? For more than
liberal fantasy when people of color live an half a century, the U.S. and other nations
entirely different reality? I have no intent have agreed chat "the exploration and use of
co blame Individuals. Rather, I want us to outer space, Including the moon and other
dig deep for the answers, so we may fi_ndt he celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the
compassionr equired to uproot hate. benefit and in the interestso f all countries,
irrespectiveo f their degreeo f economico r
Anuj Shah, Northwest Portla11d scientific development, and shall be the
provinceo f all mankind."
Are Gibson's Patriots praying?
Jim Robison, Ridgefield
We traveled In eastern Oregon this past
week. Beautiful. We attended church. We Anarchy without our blessing
prayed. We practice the Catholic faith. We
see your weekend protesters, waving hate people, particularly those from southern growth boundaries will not work if we do not Did you read the Aug. 3 Wall Street Jour
signs and accusing liberals of not praying. states,w ho sharet heses ame fears. have incentives to build more sustainable nal commentary "Anarchy breaks out In
Are tl1e right-wing protesters praying or This is Washington's problem, not Ore· dwellingsn ear masst ransit. Portland with the mayor's blessing"? Too
wavingsigns?Wh.ichis it? gon's. Why should such violence be allowed Building more sustainablyi n an ageo f sad, now the whole world knowso ur once
We are Democrats, liberal and we pray, co terrorize the citizens of Portland? There climate change should be our highest pri· beautiful city is now an unsafe hotbed of
go to church and try to treat our neighbors ls no valid reason. If they want to express orlty. Good urban design can have huge radicalism. Fortunately, there were no pie·
decently- no matter what beliefs. The their hatred and imagined superiority, they positivee ffectso n decreasingg reenhouse cures of the ugly mess. When we moved here
right-wing protesters pray?Tben act peace· shouldd o it in Vancouver.I am deeply trau gase missionsa nd the livability of a city. in 1984, Portland was a lovely and beautiful
ably and without false pride and accusation. matized by the city of Portland allowing We could easily subsidize buyers of smaller city. Downtown was safe and clean. We were
Like Christians. such to happen in a place where the same homes through a small modification of proud to call it home and readily took our
citizens paying taxes to keep this city up the mortgage interest deduction. Those out-of-statev isitorsa .roundt own to show it
Carolyn Straub and Steve McHenry, San Jose and running are subjected to such barbaric purchasings maller and more sustainable off. Not anymore - it is not safe downtown.
acts. Somebody, please, stop the insanity. dwellings could receive an addition to their The homeless are everywhere. It is a shame.
Vancouver demonstrators mortgagei nterestd eduction. while those Can't we do better than this?
don't belong in Portland Cora E. Mason, Southeast Portland buying larger dwellings - who don't really
need the tax deduction anyway- would Marlena Flores, Milwaukie
My family of three came to Portland one lncentivize sustainable not receivem ortgagei nterest deductiono n
by-one in 1950 from Shreveport, Louisiana. development their loan. Why should we subsidize large Support clean energy legislation
My parentsw anted to shield me from overt expensiveh omesw ith state taxpayer dol
racism, abject poverty and poor schooling. In the Aug. 5 guest opinion "Metro should lars? It only makes sense to subsidize what A joint committee is developing legisla
Admittedly, there was some of this when expand growth boundary, embrace density is more sustainable and energy wise growth. tion for the 2019 session co address state·
we arrived here, but nothing like I have for housing affordability." Jeff Smith, pres wide climate pollution. Gov. Kate Brown
observedi n the last coupleo f years in Port ident of the board of directors for the Home Anne Nesse, Gresham and I-lousea nd Senatel eadersa re on board.
land. I've lived here for some 67 years and BuildersA ssociationo f Metropolitan Port Nesse is directorofSustainableEcono Many representatives support the Clean
have watched Portland grow. I could not, land, explains at lease a pare of the problem miesNW.com Energy Jobs Bill, but we don't know whether
heretofore, even begin to conceive of the the Portland area is experiencing in afford the others will show up in 2019 to continue
idea of violent racists actually being allowed able housing. Why end a beautiful life? sane efforts to address global warming- the
to comet o Portland to act out their hos I would like to bring forwarda n additional major factors timulating high wildfire risk.
tilities on publicly-owned property main priority as an underlying principle: increas As I read Tamara D. Goesch's heartfelt Our responsibility is co speak for our chil
tained by the tax dollars of the citizenry of ing Incentives for building more sustainably commentary on compassionate support dren, the environment, clean water, clean air
Portland. as we grow.W e havev ery few incentivesf or of women during their abortion procedure and to the dangers of a continued reliance on
I am frightenedb y this- very frightened. builderst o designa nd build smallerd well ("Judginga woman who choosesa bortion fossilf uel until all our representativesu nder
We moved here for a better quality life, not ings of all kinds, including townhouses, tiny denies her humanity, individuality," August stand we need to end the fossil fuel era.
for condoned racism. Yesterday, I acmally houses, duplexes, foutplexes and condo· 6), I am left with only one question: Who is Please cell representatives and candi
instructed my23•year·old grandson not to miniums. We don't havee noughi ncentives offering support to the unborn child whose dates how important clean energy is to you,
leaveo ur home. I wasa fraid of what could for building moree nergye fficientd wellings life is about to be taken? You are right about your children and our planet.
happen to a young, black man in Portland on near mass transit. We need incentivesf or one thing, Tamara, life is beautiful. There
Aug.4. I amsuretherearemanyocherblack builders and buyers alike. Expanding urban are many options if a woman choosesn ot Sidney T. Brown, Ashland
Share your opinion
Letters: Limitt o 250 wordsa nd submitt o letters@oregonlan.comCo. mmentaries:S ubmit6 00-800 wordst o commentary@oregonian.coImnc. ludey ourh omea ddressa nd phonen umberf or verification.
Submissionsm ay alsob e malledt o OregonianO pinlon.1500S W FirstA ve. . Suite4 00, PortlandO, R9 7201. Alls ubmissionsb ecomet he propertyo f The Oregoniana nd willn ot be returned.S ubmissionsm ay be
editeda nd may be publishedo r otherwiseu sed in any medium.R eache ditorL auraG undersona t 503-221-8378o r lgunderson@oregonian.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.