Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Oct 31, 2018 · Page A20
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159232303/
A20 WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 31. 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Letters
FROMA19
tity is woven into this land we know as Port·
Let's rid our communities of hate land, as well as our surrounding region. As
an Indigenous person, I believe the Portland
When Jews who gathered to pray in a Clean Energy Initiative will help to restore
synagogue are slaughtered by hate, we jus balance to our land and people.
tifiably question our overall security. Any My people's ceded lands encompass 10
segment of our society so targeted feels million acres east of Portland, with usual
increased anxiety and vulnerability. As and accustomed grounds throughout the
Jews, any such event conjures up a tortur Lower Willamette Valley. Portland's choices
ous history of blood libels. pogroms and as an urban environmem directly Impact
death camps. As teens. my parents fled Nazi our access to hunting. fishing, gathering and
Germany as bigotry toward Jews increased. other traditional practices for future gener
Contributing to last week's tragedy was ations. Through the Portland Clean Energy
theshoOl'er's determination that HIAS, a cen· Initiative, we will build a holistic approach
tury old Jewish immigrant support organi to urban climate leadership. Clean energy
zation, was the source of America's undoing. infrastructure, green jobs training programs,
In this monster's warped mind, this alone sustainable agriculture and other innova
justified killing Innocent Jewish worshipers. tive effortswUI help us to adapt, mitigate and
But throughout the centuries, anti-Semites build social cohesion for those living on the
employed far weaker justifications. front lines of climate change already.
When Nazis march proclaiming. "Jews will Please join me this November as a voice
not replace us," as they did In Charlonesvllle, for future generations and a responsible
Virginia, when George Soros is denounced for caretaker of our land, waler and cultural
his support of liberal causes, when globalist resources. Portland Clean Energy Initiative
(long a canard against Jews) becomes a term will set a precedent for urban climate lead
of derision, we look over our shoulders and ership In cities nationally.
fear the security we have counted on as Jew
ish Americans disintegrating. Amanda Sq11iemplte11-Yazzie,
Today, a stranger seeing that I was wear Northeast Portland
Inga klppah stopped to share his support
for the Jewish community and his outrage Strings attached to
at the Pittsburgh attack. Such expressions Walden's 'thank you'
large and small help to assuage that fear.
They help us put the shameful act of a white Rep. Greg Walden has reportedly received
supremacist in perspective. a $200,000 campaign contribution from the
As Americans, we must not feign help pharmaceutical drug industry ("How much
lessness. Instead we must forcefully did Greg Walden, other Oregon lawmak-
denounce any and all expressions of bigotry ers rake from drug companies?" Oct.19).
- whether racist. sexist or anti-immigrant. He claims all they get in return is a thanks.
In order to keep America great, we must do Since they can expect no return on invest
all that is in our power to rid our communi ment other than, "thank you," their dona
ties of expressions of hate, which inevitably tion appears to be given solely out of a sense
encourage horrific acts, in order to provide of patriotism. Might I suggest they give that
safety and security for all. money instead to Oregon schools? I know
they wou Id be even more grateful.
Daniel Isaak, Southwest Portland
The author is rabbi emeritus of Congregation Richard Trost, Woodbur11
Neveh Shalom
Trump steamrolls, Dems cower
Trump's fear mongering
President Donald Trump, never elected
The repeated Trumpian depiction of the by a majority of voters, with a track record of
dwindling caravan of poor, weak, and des bankruptcies. loan disputes and shady tax
perate asylum seekers headed to the U.S. as schemes, now blames the Federal Reserve
an invading horde exemplifies the current Board for the recent decline in the stock
administration's strategy of building sup· markets.
port through Fearm ongering and xenopho tion attempts aimed at those who speak out governmental Panel on Climate Change. Bue Trump never, ever takes responsibility
bia. Demonlzlngothers has proven to be an against his unhinged rhetoric and unpres· hler"s tepid response coc llmatechangeacclon for his actions- Including trade disputes
effective motivatorofTrump's base. On the idential behavior. This political terrorism indicates he might not be. with China, cavalier imposition of tariffs.
chance that the rise in hate crimes is Fueled was perpetrated by a right-wing Trump sup Meanwhile, Gov. Brown isaclimatecham• pullouts from trade and peace agreements
at least in part by this rhetoric. the presi- porter egged on by a president who has no pion leader. Her strong leadership protected and other effective treaties, including cli
dent should be forced by his Republican col understanding of what America Is all about. Elliott Srnte Forest. She'll protect Oregon air mate concrol.
leagues to refrain from these verbal attacks The recipients of this attack were exercising and water from federal environment rollbacks As much as we should reject most Trump
or accept responsibility Fort he violence their First Amendment rights, which are a and she's banned offshore drilling. She also administration policies, we also should call
incited by his excoriation of minority groups. cornerstone of our democracy. supports the upcoming Clean Energy Jobs out the Democrats who are so callowly quiet
Saturday morning, a shooter entered a bill, while Buehler publicly announced he In the face of the Trump steamroller. It has
Christina Sparks, Southwest Ponla,/CI synagogue in Pennsylvania and murdered would veto it. Also, he has voted against stan even driven this lifelong Democrat to vote
and maimed worshipers there. These two dards for cleaner fuels in Oregon, making it for the Independent candidate in Oregon's
Don't tamper with what works incidents in the last week are not random easier for polluters to damage Oregon's air. He 3rd Congressional District over the incum
acts of violence but are the result or our presi earned a lifetime "F" rating from the Oregon bent Democrat, Rep, Earl Blumenauer.
Please vote "no" on Measure 105. lfthis dent's efforts to demonlze his opposition and LeagueofCOnservatlon Voters. Democratic Party leaders better find their
measure passes, our local police- paid to Feed his base. Words do matter and hate As our world continues its sad march voices or Trump is bound for 2020 with a
for by our local taxes -will be stretched mongering does have consequences. Num toward climate catastrophe, the Intergov full head of steam.
even more thin, as police may be expected ber 45 Is not making America great again ernmental Panel on Climate Change gives
to assist U.S. Immigration and Customs but dragging us into a pit or despair which is usa bilofhope- but only if we act immedi Frank DiMarco, Southeast Portland
Enforcement officials- clearly a federal diminishing us daily as a nation. ately. A vote for Buehler threatens a wasted
issue. Measure lOS's intent is to repeal a law Wake up, see these incidents for what they four years of government inaction while Medicare for all the answer
that has been working quite well for over are and vote Trump supporters out or office. deep·pockered polluters push us forward
three decades. That law was passed with That is our only hope for maintaining some into an uninhabitable planet. The Oct. 28 Oregonian/OregonLive story on
overwhelming bipartisan support. Don't grasp of freedom and dignity in our country. Polls show a strong majority of people health care costs ("For Oregonians, rate hikes
tamper with what is not broken. A "no" vote want immediate climate action. I'll vote For ease but stiU sting: 2019 Insurance Guide")
on Measure 105 is good for all ofus. Ed Bette11coun, Lake Oswego the candldale who will provide that import ends with Mark Griffith oft he consumer
ant and immediate action. My vote is for group OSPlRGw arning buyers that short-
Diane Mauox, Nonheas, Porlla11d Brown a climate champion Kate Brown. term "association" insurance plans are "junk
insurance, and norwonh the premiums,"
Political terrorism While reading the Oct. 22 Oregonian/Ore· Donna M11rphy, Nonheast Portland adding "once you need to make a claim. you
courtesy of Trump gonlive article, "'Kate Brown, Knute Bue- may find the plan doesn't cover much at all."
hler find little common ground on climate Clean energy bill promotes It seems to me that you could say the
America, pay attention! This past week, change," I was astonished at comments by holistic ecological health same about all our private insurance
bombs were sent to politicians and celeb Buehler, the Republican gubernatorial can options.
rities who Trump has been railing against didate, that showed a lackofinsightand con As a member of the Confederated Tribes Improved Medicare for all!
by name at his mob rallies since his elec cern aboutclimatechange. I wonder ifhe is of Warm Springs, climate change puts my
tion and even before. These were assassina- aware of the recent dire report from the lnler- traditional lifeways at stake. My tribal iden- Jo Alexander, Corvallis
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.