Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Fri, Jul 20, 2018 · Page B14
by< ½a,In cestry·
Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1223653641/
814 FRIDAY. JULY 20. 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Business
Dow Jones: 25,064.50 -134.79 -0.53% NASDAQ: 7,825.30 -29.15 -0.37% Oregonian Index: 937.03 +2.41 +0.26%
S&P 500: 2.804.49 -ll.13 -0.40% WIishire 5000: 29.326.27 -112.39 -0.38% Market report: Page Bl5
ENERGY DEVELOPMENT
Facebool<w ill powerP rineville Plan fort imber
high-risei n the
data centersw ith solarp rojects
Pearls helved
Mike Rogoway The 0rego11/a11/0rego11L/ve Elliot Njus The 0regon/a11/0rego11L/ve
Facebook will finance construction of six An effort to build a wooden high-rise in
large solar projects to offset power use at its Portland's Pearl District has been called off
Prineville campus, which the company says after developers failed to find a way to pay
will generate enough clean electricity to run for the pricy experiment.
all five data centers at the site. The 12-story Framework tower would
The solar projects - two just south of have been the tallest mass timber build·
downtown Prineville and four on Paclfl Ing In the U.S., serving as a valuable proof
Corp's electrical grid in Utah - will generate of concept for a burgeoning family of forest
437 megawatts of power. Facebook says it is products the state hopes will bring new jobs
equivalenr to all the energy its power-hun ro the state's timber industry.
gry computers use In Prineville. It would have housed the local offices for
"Cost-effective, renewable energy is one Beneficial Stare Bank and also included 60
of our priorities at all of our sites." said Peter subsidized apartments.
Freed, Facebook'senergystrategy manager. Bur it was criticized for its unusually
Facebook has three full-size data centers high $480,000-per-unir cost, particularly
in Prineville and is building two more. The given the substantial public investment
company has spent more than $1 billion on in the affordable units. Willamette Week,
r he projects. which first reported the project had been
It declined to say Wednesday how much shelved, wrote in January that the city's
it will cost to build the solar projects or how decision to invest in the project ignored
the cost oftbe clean energy will compare to Portland Housing Bureau cost guidelines.
what it pays now. The Framework project leaned heavily
Construction is due to begin next year, on local subsidies. Mayor Ted Wheeler had
with all six solar projects generating power committed $6 million toward the $29 million
by the end of 2020. Facebook won't build the housing project, and the housing authority
solar projects itself; PacifiCorp will contract Home Forward committed $6.S million.
with other energy companies that will build. Data centers use huge amounts of energy to run and cool the computers Inside. The solar The project was to be largely funded
own and operate the sites. power for Face book's Prineville campus is roughly equivalent to Lbe energy use of 100,000 with affordable housing tax credits. The
Greenpeace, which began campaign· Northwest homes. Thomas Boyd.file value of those tax credits, however, was
ing for Facebook ro use renewable energy diminished ahead of last year's federal tax
In Prineville even before Its first data center reform. That's left developers of affordable
opened, hailed Wednesday's news. book's Prineville campus is roughly equiva· in data centers elsewhere. Progress had housingscramblingto fill funding gaps.
"We think this is a sign of Facebook's lent to the energy use of 100,000 Northwest been slower in Oregon because of state The Framework project was short $2 mil·
strong commitment ro address its growing homes. regulations around the direct purchase lion earlier this year, and developer Project•,
energy demand with renewable energy," Prineville, with just 4,100 households, of renewable power by large energy users, a Portland firm, said it was seeking more
Gary Cook, a Greenpeace information tech· was home to Facebook's first data center in according to Scott Bolton, PacifiCorp's vice funding from the state, which has heavily
nology analyst, wrote in an email Wednes 20U. president of external affairs. promoted mass timber development.
day. The company has been continually Early last year, Bolton said, PacifiCorp Engineered mass timber products use
However, he cautioned that PacifiCorp expanding and Is now building Its fourth received approval from stare regulators for glue and a high-pressure manufacturing
is still reliant on coal-generated electricity and fifth massive facilities on the bluff above a new tariff structure that enables Face process to create wood panels and beams
across its power grid and said that power will town, drawn back again by valuable tax book and other large power users to buy with the strength of steel. State economic
help run Facebook's operations at times its breaks that have saved the company more energy associated with specific, renewable development officials have backed the
solar projects aren't operating. than $73 million ro dare. projects. industry in hopes of reviving the timber
The social networking company should Facebook accepts the scientific consen By paying the cost of the new solar proj industry and cornering the marker early.
address that, Cook said, by making other sus that human activity is responsible for ects, Bolton said Facebook will bring down Project" said rising construction costs
clean energy purchases and finding ways to climate change. And like other tech compa· the cost of renewable energy for other further contributed to the proposal's finan·
store power in pursuit of energy sources that nles, Facebook has been shifting Its power power users. clalwoes.
are completely renewable. load to renewable energy. Apple, which also "I think they're blazing the path to be Beneficial State Bank, which owns the
Data centers use huge amounts of energy operates data centers in Prineville, is offset able to tailor some of these solutions," he site, said in a statement it plans to pursue a
to run and cool the computers inside, which ting its electricity use there with a mix of said. new iteration of the project.
host social networking photos. email and solar, wind and hydropower.
other online data. The solar power for Face- Facebook already uses renewable energy @rogo,vay5; 03-294-7699 e11jus@oregonian.co151013-;2 94-5034
BLOOMBERG BILLIONAIRES INDEX ECONOMY
With$ 150b illion,J eff Bezos the richestm an ever Oregont own has nation's4 th
worst job market,s tudy says
Levi Sumagaysay Mercury News Seattle company has since grown from of Bezos has skyrocketed by $52 billion. Looking for a job in Oregon? Don't count
an on line bookseller to the world's richest Bloomberg also noted that Bezos's indi on Grants Pass. Thar's according to a
With his net worth topping SISO billion, retailer and a massive cloud computing vidual wealth almost equals the $151.S study by career sire Zlppla that named the
Jeff Bezos is now the wealthiest person in company. billion controlled by the Waltons of southern Oregon town as the fourth worst
modern history. Bezos reached bis wealth milestone as Wal mart fame, the world's richest family. job market in the United States for 2018.
That's according to the Bloomberg Bil· thousands of Amazon warehouse employees Mark Zuckerberg is No. 4 on the list. Zippia looked at 386 metro areas and
Ilona ires Index, which as of Tuesday showed in Europe are on strike, demanding better The Facebook CEO was No. 3 just over a ranked wage change, unemployment rare
that the Amazon CEO is more than $55 bil· wages and working conditions. Amazon has week ago, passing investor Warren Buf• change and unemployment rate to arrive
lion ahead of the world's second-richest per· long faced such protests. fett. But because of the stock market, at its conclusions. Grants Pass has an
son, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, whose An Amazon spokeswoman said the com· Zuckerberg's $82.8 billion net worth employed population of24,810, an unem·
net worth is $95.3 billion. pany "provides a safe and positive work· trailed Buffett's $83 billion Tuesday. ployment rare ofS.2 percent and an annual
Bezos reached the $ISOb illion mark Mon place with competitive pay and benefits France's Bernard Arnau It, chairman of mean wage of$39,020.
day, making him richer than anybody else from day one." LVMHM oet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, is No. Medford showed up at No. 21o n the list.
since 1982, when Forbes first published As for Bill Gares, he would be worth about S with $76.1 billion. No or her Oregon towns are in the top SO.
Its annual wealth ranking, according to $150 billion today if it weren't for his philan The richest woman ls France's Francoise Ocean City, New Jersey, was No. I. Zip·
Bloomberg. The Bloomberg index is a daily thropy, Bloomberg notes. Bettencourt Meyers, who controls 33 per pia also looked at the nation's best job mar
wealth tracker. With Amazon's stock up more than cent of cosmetics maker r.:oreal. She's No. kets. No Oregon town showed up in the top
Bezos founded Amazon in 1994. The 55 percent so far this year, the net worth ll on the list with $48.9 billion. 100. - Karly /11111s
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.