Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Mar 11, 2018 · Page B5
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1224225272/
THE OREGONIAN SUNDAY. MARCH 11. 2018 85
Oregonian, the same issue which printed his opinion piece IN MY OPINION
also featured the second In a three-part series about how
the instability of renters' current situation impacts stu C'mon Courtney:' Cap and
dents ("Big churn, big problems, Feb. 28). Is he actually
reading this paper?
lfhe Is truly concerned about making, "Oregon a better
place for all, going forward," I request he prove it. gown?' It's time to get serious
Brian J. McGahren, Tigard
Weddingc akes don't kill
AnthonyE ffinger valley floors in Heard's district because the lowlands were
I will agree with Peter J. Watson's March 7 letter, "Discrim becoming too dry.
ination double-standard." about a double standard between Dear Senate President Courtney, Does Rep. Heard know that Ro eburg Is a timber town?
a bakery who refused to bake a cake for certain couples and I'm writing to let you know that I'm going to stop paying Does he understand that Douglas firs grow taller in Oregon
corporations who raised the age limit to purchase certain for garbage pick-up at my house in Northeast Portland. I'm than anywhere else because of our cool, wet climate? Does
firearms. if he can show me the last time a wedding cake was just going to toss my trash into the street until the 2019 leg he know there won't be any timber jobs if there is no timber?
used to murder 17s tudents and staff at a high school. islative session, when you've vowed to take action on cli Next, I went to see Sen. Bill Hansell. I liked the man. He
As a society, we have age restrictions for when someone mate change. really listened to us. Then he told us, bluntly, that no way
can drive, when they can purchase alcohol, etc. They are Cool? could be vote for Clean Energy Jobs in the short session.
enacted to protect both the individual and sociery at large. If big polluters get another year to spew greenhouse That old chestnut. It got worse. He said that his caucus. the
Firearms, which are demonstrably more lethal, must have gases Into the air with no payment for the damage they"re Republicans, had labeled Clean Energy Jobs a "bad bill." I
the same restrictions. It would be criminal and deadly to doing, I should be allowed to throw my tofu tubs and ice cringed.
do otherwise, whether it's allowing a 12-year·old to drive, cream pints into the street, right? I may even cancel sewer Which big brain in the Republican caucus decided that
a 14-year-old to consume alcohol or a 17-year-old to pur service and dig a cesspool in my parking strip. Clean Energy Jobs was a "bad bill"? Was it Sen. Alan Olsen,
chase a weapon of war. You good with that? vice chair of the environment and natural resources com
In a bizarre news conference on Jan. 29, you claimed that mittee? He has a degree in chemistry from Purdue. Did he
Krikor Naccachian, Tualatin this year's 35-day legislative session - that ended with a skip class the day they talked about a mineral called car·
climate-ignoring whimper on March 3 - was too short to bonate and how it's harder to form in oceans as the water
Student advocates point the way consider complex cap-and-trade climate bills like the one becomes more acidic from absorbing carbon dloxlde?
that your own Democratic caucus supports. You know who needs carbonate? The oysters at Oregon
Hats off to the Lake Oswego students who paid their own I say bizarre because you kept calling the system "cap Oyster Farm in Newport. They have a tougher time making
way to Salem on March S to rally at the state Capitol for a and gown." Was that supposed to be funny? Like. the JO shells without it. Maybe Republicans don't like oysters. Or
safer Oregon ("Oregon high school students back gun con years of work that scientists and lawmakers have put into Jobs in aquaculture.
trol in rally; March S).A s adults, we owe itto young Orego these bills is something to be mocked? What does a gown A year used to be nothing in the life of the earth. But
nians to listen to them and do whatever it takes to promote have to do with climate change? because humans are emitting so much carbon, so fast, a
their well-being and safery. Even those not directly affected The Democrats who pushed for action did so because the year has come to matter. Every year is warmer than the last.
by violence have grown up with regular loc.kdownd rills In legislature already took up the Clean Energy Jobs bills in the Every 12 months, we put another 37 billion metric tons of
school and live with the fear of an active shooter on campus. long, luxurious 160-day session last year. Nothing happened carbon dioxide into the air.
We buckle our toddlers into car seats and accept the govern· then, so why should I believe that you11d o something in 2019? President Courtney, I think you balked at the bills this
mental regulations mandating we do so, right? I went to Salem to lobby for the bills earlier this month. year because you don't want to make your caucus vote on
It's time to listen to our children and take real steps to The organizers said it was the biggest lobby day in Salem climate change before the 2018 elections. True, the assault
protect them from guns. For starters, the state Legislature for any issue, ever. It didn't seem to matter. from industry, and the Koch brothers, would be relentless.
should close the gun show loophole and ban assault weap I was supposed to go pester Lew Frederick, my state sen· And some of your team might go down.
ons in Oregon. Hunting rifles? Yes. Assault weapons and ator, about keeping the planet habitable for my kids, ages Gov. Tom McCall faced similar opposition from business
bump stocks? No. 12 and 14. But the group heading to his office was huge, so when he pushed to keep Oregon's coastline open to the pub
Thank you, students, for pointing the way. Keep I tagged along with other, tiny teams going to see Repub· lic in 1967.H e didn't make excuses. Nor did he call the Ore·
demanding adults with power listen and act. lican legislators who probably won't vote for a climate bill gon Beach Bill the "Oregon Bleach Bill," or some other non·
until the Willamette Valley looks like the Sahara. sensical, really unfunny name. He got in a helicopter and
Patrick Walsh,S ouilnvestP onla11d First, we went to Rep. Dallas Heard's office. He couldn't went to the beach with surveyors.
be bothered to talk about climate change, so he sent in his I'm not really going to put my trash in the street. I wottld
Racism is a crime attentive and earnest chief of staff. He didn't know a thing never. And I wish big polluters would stop putting their trash
about the Clean Energy Jobs bills. Nor did he seem con in the air, or that one of our leaders would stop them.
Leonard Pitts Jr.'s March 3 commentary, "The question cerned when one of Heard's constituents, a forester. told
Trump failed to answer; could not have been more clearly him that Douglas fir trees may not be able to grow on the Amllo11yE ffinger lives in Northeast Pon/and.
or honestly stated. When will our bigotry and racism stop
being such a huge sin on our white hearts and souls? What
will It take for all ofus ln this wonderful, diverse country
to treat one another as equals and with respect? Racism is
a crime. It needs to be treated as such.
AIIII Duffy, Boring
Under 21:D o not pass go
The current push Is for a minimum age of21 years to
purchase a firearm. That's fine, but while we're at it, let's
go ahead and fix some other stuff, as well.
No vehicle ownership or operation until age 21. No vot
ing until age 21. No college debt may be incurred until age
21. No draft registration until age 21. And while we are at
it, fix that whole gender discrimination thing with that
as well. o militaryserviceuntilage21- a gun maybe
involved. No credit cards until age 21, no loans, no age of
majority ror marriage, contracts, etc.
LeeD uncan,D amascus
Blaming officials isn't a solution
In the March 7 letter, "Portland's rose-colored glasses,"
Daniel Grosmick blames our "inept city and state leaders."
for trash and hypodermic neeclles. We are in the midst of an
epidemic. Solutions are desperately needed and blaming
ciry and state officials isn't a solution. What about personal
responslbility?The way out is education ..t reatment and
sobriety- but only if addicts step forward. Blaming city
and state officials for the choices of addicts doesn't help. Oregon Senate President Peter Courtney, D-Salem, sits with Majority Leader Ginny Burdick, D-Portland, and Senate Republi
can Leader Jackie Winters, R-Salem, at the beginning of the short legislative session this year. Chris Grygiel,A ssociacedP ress
Mike Ma11/01N1,o n/least Portla11d
mJ
<lth(eJ ])regonianFo unded December 4, 1850. Established as a EDITORJALB OARD CONTACT
daily February 4.1861. The Sunday Oregonian John F. Maher, President Laura Gunderson, commentary@oregonian.com
OREGON LIVE established December 4, 1881.I ncorporating Mark Katches, Editorial Pages Editor letters@oregonlan.com
OREGONIANM EOIAG R0U' the Oregon Journal since 1982. Editor/VP of Content Helen Jung, Associate Editor
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.