Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Nov 7, 2018 · Page A19
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159196263/
THE OREGONIAN WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2018 A19
MULTNOMAH COUNTY
McGuirlb, eats Learnf or auditor'ss eat
Jeff Manning. Ted Sickinger, Kale WU Hams, Aimee Green The Orego11ia11/0rego11Uve
In Multnomah County, Jennifer McGuirk
decisively beat Scott Learn in the race for
auditor, according to preliminary results
Tuesday.
The race lhal pitted two practicing audl·
tors and former journalists was expected to
be close, but McGuirk swept past Learn SS.3
percent to 44 percent.
McGuirk, 43, has worked In the county
auditor's office for six years. The Alaska
native has a bachelor's degree in journalism
from the University of Oregon and a master's
degree in public administration from Port
land State University.
She was backed by organized labor, which
helped her raise $16.993i n campaign dona
tions.
Learn is on the auditing staff at the Ore
gon Secretary of State's Officea nd is a former
certified public accountant at Price Water
house. Learn received most of the major
press endorsements, including that of The
Oregonian/OregonLive, where he worked as
a reporter for 17y ears.
Learn raised $18.536I n campaign contri
butions.
Both candidates vowed to bring a new
energy to the office and have been critical
of current auditor Steve March for being too A long line of people wanting to vote formed outside the Multnomah County elections officei n Southeast Portland by
slow to move on important issues. mldaftcrnoon on Election Day. Betsy Hammond, staff
BALLOT MEASURES
In Portland. voters approved by a wide regressive and businesses would likely pass struck down by a judge this year. Judge Eric Souede had worked as general counsel for
margin Measure 26-201, a tax on large busi their costs on to consumers, raising prices Bloch of the Multnomah County Circuit the governor's office from 2015 to 2017 and
nesses that will fund clean-energy pro on goods across all income levels in the city. Court ruled campaign spending caps ere• garnered wide support from elected officials.
grams and job training in an effort to meet The City Club of Portland, which endorsed ated by the county measure were "imper AmongSouede's endorsements: Multnomah
clean-energy goals set by the city. The mea the measure, conducted an analysis that missible .. under che Oregon Constitution's County District Attorney Rod Underhill.
sure passed 64 percent to36 percent. found no evidence the tax would affect free speech proteclions. Supporters have Oregon Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum,
The measure, which appeared on ballots prices for consumers. appealed. all seven state Supreme Court justices, and
as the Portland Clean Energy Community Also Tuesday, Portland voters over Jason Kafoury, organizer for the county 35 of his 37 Multnomah County Circuit Court
Benefits Initiative. will levy a I percent tax whelmingly adopted Measure 26-200, estab and city measures. has said his coalition colleagues. Souede said his 16y ears of expe
on businesses that make more than $1b illion lishing strict campaign finance limits for hopes the Oregon Supreme Court will even rience in various areas of law since he gradu
in gross revenues nationally and S500,000 city races - limits that are likely to be chal tually reverse its 1997d ecision striking down ated from Harvard Law School and his judi
locally. lenged in court. Tuesday returns were nearly campaign finance caps. Several of the jus cial track record have shown others that he's
Groceries. medicine and health care ser· 88 percent In favor. tices at the time were Republican appoin right for the job.
vices would be exempl. The measure amends the city charter to tees; today, they are all Democratic appoin Callahan, a longtime trial lawyer, ran on
Proponents said the program would raise limit individual or political committee dona• tees. the platform of giving voters a choice. Too
roughly $30 million a year for Portland's tions to SSOOp er election cycle, limits cam often, Callahan contended, judges retire
Climate Act'ion Plan, which calls for using paign spending and requires campaigns to CIRCUIT COURT before their terms are up, leaving the gover
clean, renewable energy for 100 percent of disclose advertising funders, among other In Multnomah County's only contested nor to appoint a replacement. Then. voters
the city's power needs. restrictions. The limits apply to races for circuit court judge race, Ben Souede - who almost always re-elect the "incumbent" in
Those opposing the measure - most Portland mayor, commissioner and auditor. was appointed by Gov. Kate Brown more the next election.
notably the 1.900-member Portland Busl· Multnomah County voters adopted a than 16m omhs ago- fended off a challenge Voters chose Souede 68 percent to 32 per
ness Alliance- argued thal the tax would be nearly identical measure in 2016. but il was by Portland lawyer Bob Callahan. cent.
WASHINGTON COUNTY METRO COUNCIL
Harrington to replace Duyck as board chair Race for District 2 seat
Eder Campuzano and Bethany Barnes The Orego11ia11/0ngo11Live in dead heat
Washington County voters on Tuesday elected Metro the largest issues facing Washington County. Terry favored
Councilor Kathryn Harrington to chair the board of com· construction of a new major thoroughfare to connect the
missioners, defeating Commissioner Bob Terry. suburbs to Vancouver, a proposal that state and regional Kale Wllllams TlleOrego11iC1t1/0rego11Live
Harrington will replace Andy Duyck, who did not seek officials have scuttled. Harrington pushed a regional
re-election after serving on the Washington County Board of approach that Includes pedestrians, bicycles. cars, buses Joe Buck and Christine Lewis were virtually tied Tues
Commissioners for 32 years. the last eight as chair. and trains. day night as both vied to be the next councilor for Metro
"'Ourw in is a statement for what can happen when people Harrington will sit alongside cwo newcomers to the District 2, which encompasses parts of southwest Portland
take a stand against the status quo," Harrington campaign board in January: Pam Treece, executive director of the and Clackamas County.
spokesperson Amy Enbysksaid Tuesday night. "We're going Westside Economic Alliance, and former Hillsboro Mayor Lewis had a narrow lead over Buck, 50.3 percent to
to celebrate our victory tonight. but Kathryn is ready to get Jerry Willey. 49 percent, as of 8:40 p.m.
to work." Buck, 37, is a small business owner. For the past four
Terry's campaign did not respond to requests for com Tigard-Tualatin levy: Voters in the Tigard-Tualatin years, he's served on the Lake Oswego City Council, where
ment Tuesday night. school district approved a levy to help pay for teachers. he pushed for increased density and public health policies.
Harrington, 58, won a plurality during the May primary. Tigard-Tualatin schools have counted on a levy to help I-lew on 38 percent of the vote in the primary.
Terry, 72, came in second. setting up Tuesday's runoff. fund teachers since 2000. Lewis works as a lobbyist and legislative director for the
The race's outcome shifts the five-member board's long Measure34-285 renews the status quo, with a rate set not Bureau of Labor and Industries. In 2016, she managed the
time conservative coalition, which has held a 3-2 majority for to exceed $1 per $1,000 of assessed value. District officials housing bond campaign in Ponland and sits on a number
nearly three decades. anticipate that the levy will bring the district $50 million of boards and committees. She won just under23 percent of
The race was among the most expensive regional con over five years. the vote in the primary.
tests in the state. Harrington raised nearly $290,000, a fig The current levy expires in 2020·21. The seven-member Metro Council oversees a regional
ure bolstered by SI00,000 she lent her campaign, according Proponents said the levy is needed to fund roughly 100 government agency responsible for land-use planning and
to the Oregon Secretary of State's Office.T erry raised nearly teachers and protect classroom sizes. Without the levy, the other programs.
S210,000. district would have faced a $9.4 million hole in its budget
Both candidates agreed that traffic congestion is one of once the current levy expires. kwifliams@oregonian.com;SD3-294-4048
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.