Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Jul 4, 2018 · Page A16
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1223654447/
A16 WEDNESDAY. JULY 4, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
IN MY OPINION
Mom,D ad,I 'ma baseballs chool
Cameron Anderson
A bit of humorous commentary "written by"
OregonS eate University
I wanted to write this letterto you in order
to explain something that in all reality, you
probably already know. Mom, Dad, I'm a
baseball school.
I don't know how you wUIr eact to hearing
this. You guys have always been so support·
ive of everything I have done. So I don't want
you to think you did anything wrong. It's
just ... the media, friends, colleagues, even
professors expect me to be a football school.
At least that's how it feels sometimes. Dad,
I'll never forget the look on your face when
I brought home the Fiesta Bowl trophy. I've
never seen you so proud. Even though all I
could think about that day was how close
spring training was.
Also, I'm not saying I'm jealous. But I see
how proud you are of Oregon. You have to
look at it from my point of view: The guy I
always knew as the fun, artistic little brother
all of a sudden marries into money. Before
I knew what happened, he's the jock in the
family. Don't get me wrong, Phil is great.
And I am so happy for both of them. I just
hope someday you will be just as proud of
me.
I don't know if it came from the old hurt
ful stereotypes that "you can't build a base
ball program in the rain." Or that truthfully,
for a time, I believed I was a football school.
I suppose it was probably during a trip to
Nebraska a little more than IOy ears ago that
I finally accepted who I was. Even lfl wasn't Fans rally at Pioneer Courthouse Square to celebrate the 2018 College World Series champions last week. Sean Meagher/Scaff
abletoadmittoyou until now.
You remember my friend Cal? Cal Fuller
ton. Yeah, the baseball school. Well he was about BCS committees, wealthy donors or you, you haven't been the same. Just looking being who we really are. It doesn't matter if
there. Along with his buddy Rice. Well, peo bowl sanctions. A world you can just be who at you I can tell deep down you are a base you're a football school, a baseball school or
ple have known they are baseball schools you truly are. ball school. Florida, I think you may feel the even a lacrosse school.
forever, and they have never been hap Through this letter I hope to encourage same way. I saw it even before that jerk Urban GoBeavs!
pier or more confident. Anyway, both of others to be who they really are as well. LSU, leftyou.
them opened me up to a world I never knew I can't imagine what it's like growing up in I hope someday these letters won't need CameronA 11derso/1Iv1e /11T igard.
existed. One where you didn't need to worry the south. But let's face it. Since Nick left to be written, and we can just be comfortable
IN MY OPINION
TriMet needs to prioritize electric buses for community health
Jessica Vega Pederson renewable sources by 2035 and our entire energy system,
including transportation, come from 100 percent renewable
TriMet is a key leader in our community in reducing con source by 2050. In order to reach those goals, TriMet needs
gestion and increasing livability. Now the transit agency also to be a proactive partner.
has the opportunity to make our community healthier and Electric buses provide quality of life benefits for both
reduce noise and climate impacts by phasing out its diesel riders and for those who live near bus lines. Lower to the
buses and electrifying its fleet by 2035. ground, they are considerably quieter than traditional buses.
Transit agencies throughout the country are setting ambi As TriMet appropriately increases the frequency of buses
tious goals to move away from diesel buses to those with bat along many routes and in historically underserved parts of
tery packs and electric motors. Our neighbors to the north in our community, electric buses would have tremendous ben
King County will add 120 new all-electric buses over the next efits for transit riders and the communities through which
three years and transition to a zero-emission fleet by 2034. buses operate.
New YorkC ity announced it will convert its bus system to an In our region and across Oregon. we pride ourselves on our
all-electric fleet by 2040 or sooner. San Francisco has com environmental leadership and innovative policies. Remov
mitted to an all-electric fleet by 2035. ing Harbor Drive from the Portland waterfront. Implement
Tri Met is buying just five electric buses. We can and must ing the urban growth boundary to protect farm and forest
do better. land. Instituting the bottle bill. lmpiementing Clean Fuels
Our region suffers from significant diesel pollution, standards and the Coal to Clean legislation. And TriMet has
which is 100 times more toxic than gasoline exhaust and Passengers board an electric bus ln Watertown, played a key role and been a leader in this field, from rein
has particles so fine they slip through the lungs and into the Massachusetts. Cities across tbc country are modernizing troducing urban rail to pioneering more accessible low-floor
bloodstream and brain. Average diesel pollution levels in their fleet with electric buses and setting aggressive light rail cars.
Multnomah County are at least five to 10 times more than goals to buy more. However, writes Multnomah County Now Tri Met has the opportunity to clean-up our air, take a
Oregon·s state-established health benchmark. Commissioner Jessica vega Pederson, Tri.Meti s buying just bold step in protecting the climate and make our region even
When you apply Washington state's more protective five. Steven Se111teA,s sociated Press more livable in one fell swoop. It's time for TriMet to reflect
benchmark, the Portland metro area exceeds safe levels by our values by moving forward with a bold vision and sound
as many as 8,555 times. strategy for electrifying the bus fleet.
Tri Met is the largest user of diesel fuel in all of Oregon. electricity by 2030, meaning electric buses will be powered
The agency's bus fleet still uses many older buses that lack entirely from clean energy sources in the not too distant JessicaV egaP edersoni s a Multnomah Cou11tycommissio11er
pollution controls. making Tri met a major contributor to future. Moreover. batteries in these vehicles could serve as representingp art.so f southeast Portland. She also served
this public health issue. Its buses run constantly through a key power storage facility as the region inches towards a /11il leOrego1L1e g/s/a111rea1c1hda ired LileH ouseE nergy&
our dense neighborhoods and by our schools, hospitals and "smart" and more efficient electrical grid. Environment Commiltee.
playgrounds. Multnomah County and Portland also have established
State legislation will phase out the use of coal-generated a regional goal that our electricity come from 100 percent
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.