Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Aug 15, 2018 · Page A20
by ~ ancestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1223639092/
A20 WEDNESDAY. AUGUST 15. 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
and energy dealing with dangerous felons.
Don't toll working A tour through any courthouse in the state
poor off freeway would show otherwise.
Ou rcouns· dockets are choked with
Asche Transportation Commission for minor crimes. Our public defenders and
wards its recommendation to the Oregon line prosecutors alike are overworked
Department of Transportation. rwonderif beyond he lief. Why? Because Oregon's D/\s
or hers are thin king what I am rhin king: Is make it their policy to pursue Mlowh ang-
It a good idea to relieve freeway congestion Ing frult.MT hey pursue marginalized people
by charging com mule rs for the privilege of with minor charges in tremendous volume,
using highways? rather than investing resources on cases
Oregon's Democrat-com rolled legis• where they will have che most impact.
la1u re am.I governor's olflce purport to That ·s a huge problem. The resources
care for lhe poor and working class. Yet a they pour imo petty infractions come from
state agency moves to relieve congestion our taxes. Our counhouses arc crammed
by charging for Portland highways. Who with alleged shoplifters, mentally ill streel
will be most impacted by this?The !ower yellers. homeless public urinJIOrs and drug
income worker and the working poor. This users. The answer isn'1 spending more on
will not affect wcalthv commuters because Jaw enforcement for more of the same.
they can pay it. It wula ffect the working Instead of rewarding DAs for the num
poor. ber of cases they take on and prosecute,
Why<lo we think It isa good Idea to let's look upstream and decide what kinds
monetize a system already paid for by tax of crimes should actually go to trial. Other
payers? The answer is simple: Greed. As wise, the social benefits will remain mini
the state rolls in large sums of new reve mal. and largely arbitrary. Almost everyone
nue from the new transportation tax, the breaks rules. Even prosecutors speed. Yet.
response is to ask for more in the form of ~;~•1-- they're not the ones sitting behind bars for
tolls. four months waiting to see a jury.
Yes. the highways are going to be easier Justice is not a numbers game, and we
to drive. llowever. this policy means many shouldn't pay for law enforcemem policies
working people will need to find another that don't give us anything but a higher
way to work. This is regressive and unfair. tax bill. We need disuict attorneys who are
AsaMolallaclty councilor, I am aware i::e,1 more concerned with the quality of justice
this implementation will impact the resi we seek than the quantity of charges they
dents of my city, the vast majority of whom /) can bring.
are commuters. We need to repair our own
roads in Molalla. How can we do that if the ClrnrliePeino11, Swthwe$t Portland
state takes more and more money from our Peirson is wI attorney with tire Muft1wmah
residents? Dcfc11dcrsI nc.
Please reconsider your position on coils
In Portland. Perhaps a better solution Fessing up is hard to do
would be 10 build roads to accommodate
the traffic. It ·s become fashionable among my social
media friends to portray President Donald
DeLise Palumbo. Molalla Trump supporters as morons and traitors.
Pa/11111/wJoa s elect eel Molalla dt\•cv1mdlor I personally know son1e of these people.
i112016. • They arc friends. co-workers and neighbors.
I know them to be good-hearted, intelligent
Vote clean energy and Clean Energy Jobs. Then in January. let's negatively atfecc 1heir health? and patriotic.
hold them to it hold them to it. It seems as unlikely these folks have
Stcphc11K ingsbury, Beaverton suddenly become apologists for our coun·
I am a grandmother who helps care for MarJ::arccS mith, FareseG rove try's enemies as the FBI turning into :i
my granddaughter. It's heartbreaking to see Scooters an accident hotbed of liberal bias and ..:orruption over
how summer in Oregon has changed in the Schools are not wailing to happen night. So why are people who just a few
short time between my daughter's child drive-thrus years ago would have called me a commie
hood and my granddaughter's. Rental scooters are already a problem. pinko liberal suddenly sporting T-shirts
When my daughter was little. her sum Harrie! Tubman Middle School has been They are proliferating, and whatever period reading. "I'Lir ather he Russian than Dem
mer days were spent wholly outside: rid- in the news recently because of the poor air oftimetheywere in "test" mode seems a ocrat:· or waving the Russian flag while
ing bikes, exploring the woods, playing quality at the school due to a nearby free joke. The scooter riders are clearly not all standing guard over Trump's liollywood
games in the park, spending weeks at Camp way. It may be a shock to administrators, over 18, fewenhan half I have seen in the star?
Namanuor swimming at the neighborhood teachers and parents, bu1 when administra last few days are wearing helmets. Many are We have an amazingahility to hold con
pool. I fear my granddaughter will not expe• tors allow parents to idle vehicles while they riding on sidewalks and others are monop tradictory thoughts in our brains to deal
rience these same carefree summers. Thi.s wait todropoff or pick up their children the olizing bike lanes at relatively high speeds. with a complicated world while preserv-
year, there have been many days when it is vehicles create an invisible toxic cloud of Today, I passed two scooter renters on ing our self-image as good, decent patriotic
simply too hot for her to go outside all after pollution the students must pass through. Northeast 3,kd Avenue. They were leenag Americans. Do these otherwise intelligent
noon. Their lungs are still developing and they ers with no helmets, riding on the sidewalk folks truly believe the Clintons are so pow
According to the American Academy of breathe at a faster rate than adults. Students and visibly weaving and hobbing somewhat erful that they've repeatedly gotten away
Pedlarrics. children are more susceptible are at risk for developing asthma. emphy outofconrrol. with murder- though nm quire powerful
to 1emperarnre extremes because they are sema. lung cancer and other respira10rydls I'd sure like to see the test results that enough to win an election?Or thal the FRI
less able to regulate their body tempera eases. indicated these were safe to add to our has been taken over by a deep state conspir
ture than adults. They are more likely to Our society is addicted to a drivc-thru streets and sidewalks. In addition to dis acy to frame the president?
experience dehydration. heat exhaustion. Schools are not a drive-rhru. Many schools tracted drivers on smarrphones. inept Conspiracy theories a re always attractive
heat cramps and heat stroke. The vast across the U.S. and Canada have gone idle scooter riders who nagranrly disobey all to people who feel belittled and disregarded
majority agree, and it's not hard to see free. There are several idle-free school the rules of the road arc just what we need. I by intelle<.·tuale lites. It's nice to think you're
they're right. sites on the internet, such as iturnitoff. hope no one gets seriously injured or killed. the one who understands what's really
Anyone who grew llp or raised their chil com/schools and Idle Free Schools on going on, while others just don't get it. These
dren in Oregon can see things are different. YouTuhe. MichadG. WriJ:}lf. Norrlteast Portfr111d good-hearted Americans may know it's
Jt ·s time we step up with bold solutions. Forthe health ofourchildren. I urge totally wacko and wrong. but they desper
Passing the Clean Euergy Jobs bill is one administrators, teachers and pareuts to Justice shouldn't be ately want to believe. The alternative - to
of the most important things we can do do the research and present their cases to a numbers game admit in theirquesttoshake up Washington
in 2019. This November. let's vote for cli school boards and pa rem-teacher organi or make America great again. they've made
mate champions. If a campaign calls you zations. Schools are for teaching the next Timothy Colahan's recent guest editorial a horrible, horrible mistake- is so much
or knocks onthcdoor, ask them what their generation. What arc we teaching the nc.xt ("The truth about Oregon's criminal justice worse.
candidate will do to make Oregon a leader generation: It's acceptable to wasre natu system." Aug. 8) would bave ~•oub elieve rhar
onclima1e. Ask them if they will vote yes on ral resources. pollute the environment and Oregon's district attorneys spend theirtime Amlreu Doh~on, NorrlteClscP ortland
Share your opinion
Letters: Limitt o 250 wards and submit to letters,aoregonian.comC. ommentaries: Submit6 00-800 words to commentary\0.'Qregonian.coImnc. ludey our home address and phone number for verification.
SubmissJOnms ay also be mailedt o OregonianO pinlon.1500S WF irstA ve.. Suite4 00. Portland.O R9 7201 Alls ubmissionsb ecome the propertyo f The Oregoniana nd willn ot be returned. Submissionsm ay be
edited and may be publishedo r otherwiseu sed 1n any medium.R eache ditor LauraG undersona t 503-221-8378o r lgunderson@oregonian.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.