Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Sep 30, 2018 · Page B2
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159237892/
82 SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR nesses and needs of individuals Is legend
ary. He supports economic strength while
A disdain for women simultaneously reaching out to those who
need a helping hand, a clinic or a special
There are tho e who would have us program. He has accomplished all this over
believe Brett Kavanaugh's alleged incident years of fiscal prudence, guiding county
was simply youthful indiscretion. However, spending to develop critical services with
the act of an empted rape, even if it happens out raising taxes for twenty years. His oppo
only once, belles a disdain for women as sition Kathryn Harrington, recently retired
part of that person's character. Kavanaugh from Metro Council, has suddenly discov
is an intelligent man. He would quickly real ered Washington County and thinks she
ize continuing this behavior endangers his should jump into the chair of our county
higher ambitions. So, he turns to law, and commission. Alas, she is a self-proclaimed
manifests his lack of respect for women by progressive, big spending, big government,
taking away their rights. elitist breed of politician. Why ever would
we change?
CarolH owe, Tigard I Invoke thatwisebltofadvlce, ifit isn't
broken, don't fix it. Keep Bob Terry as Wash·
Republicans'h ypocrisy ington County commission chair.
With the notable exception of Sen. Jelf Joan H. Sm/ch, Come/111s
Flake's terse remarks, I found the moral out•
rage that all the other Republican judiciary McGuirkf or Multnomah
committee members exhibited in Thurs County auditor
day's hearings to be the height of hypocrisy.
Where was their moral high horse when Jennifer McGuirk is the most qualified
none of them objected to Mitch McCon· candidate for Multnomah County auditor.
nell refusing to even engage in hearings on She has earned a master's degree in public
the lawful nomination of Merrick Garland administration, a more relevant and broader
by President Obama? Now they would like qualification than certified public accountant
to accuse the Democrats of playing poli- status. An M PAp rovides knowledge of local
tics, trying to stall the nomination process government operation; how to analyze elfec
until afterthe upcoming election. That Is, tlveness, efficiency and challenges. It is the
of course, exactly what the Republicans did best preparation for managing performance
in 2016. It's as if the chickens came home auditing. Many equity and other qualitative
to roost and the Republicans were not too analyses cannot be quantified in dollars.
happy about it. Now, singing a different McGuirk is also more qualified by her
tune, McConnell et al. want to just "plow working knowledge of Multnomah County
right through." itself, an organization with complex pub-
To me, Dr. Ford came olf much more sym lic service responsibilities. Her combined
pathetic and believable than Judge Kavana strengths make her the candidate I trust the
ugh, with all his filibustering and refusals most to improve both financial and quali
to answer simple and direct questions. The tative accountability by selecting the right
Republicans looked rattled, and they should audit topics and managing her stalf, with
be. The American electorate, and a whole lot CPA and other certifications, 10s cope and
of women, are paying close attention. complete audits effectively on our behalf.
DennisS kipper, Northeast Pore/and Beth Woodward,S owhwest Portland
Woodwardl s a retired senior managemelll
Be a part of the solution •1W ONDEWRH YW OMENDOIHCOMEFORWARDMOREOFTEN?' audicorf or the city of Portland.
for homeless
building. You need 10s tart taking a per As it relates to environmental advocacy, Buehlerr epresents
In response to guest columnist Alex Steg sonal Interest In the people who sincerely we already have Energy Trust of Oregon. In all Oregonians
ner ("As we rebuild Lincoln High, let's think just want to go home. if you aren't part of 2017,t his government-mandated nonprofit
of creating inclusive public spaces," Sept. the problem, you can be a part of the solu had $194.2 million in revenue, from utility J met Knute Buehler in 2012, just
19):I used rnsiton a blanket in front of the tion. Own it, Portland. taxes paid by consumers. Energy Trust has before he ran for secretary of state. I was
Portland Rescue Mission. I met with social a similar mission to the Clean Energy Fund, impressed with him then and continue to be
workers, filled out forms and asked ques Ruth Rader, Miles City, Mo111a11a a 20-yeartrack record, significant resources impressed.
tions at City Hall. Then Paul Carlson, home and robust infrastructure. Starting another Knute has moderate ideas, which rep·
less and supportive housing specialist with CleanE nergyF und outcomes redundant initiative seems wasteful and resent all Oregonians, not just one party.
Washington's U.S. Department of Housing inefficienta nd hazy a misuse of tax revenue that is critically That's why I'm supporting him for governor
office, contacted an agency. I was provided needed elsewhere. in November.
with a downtown Portland apartment. but I The Portland Clean Energy Fund appears I urge Portlanders to do their homework Knute appeals especially to people in the
was put in the wrong place. to be well-intentioned, but misses the point. before reflexively voting "yes" on the Port middle, like me - people whose views are
I ended up leaving that apartment after Our community has a recurring theme of try land Clean Energy Fund. If we start a new not represented by interest group politics.
a drug dealer's death threats became too ing to get businesses to pay their "fair share." tax, let's use the funds for something that He is willing to break from his party if that's
intense. Whatever level you define as "fair," the use of moves the needle and directly benefits more what he feels is necessary to get things
I have a home in Montana now. I got it funds described in the Clean Energy Fund is of Portland's immediate issues: homeless done.
because two average citizens decided to not the best use of Incremental tax dollars, ness, underperforming schools, growth Knute Buehler's approach to politics is
help. I never dealt with an agency and I only from business or other sources. outstripping infrastructure and lack of eco that he makes the lives of all Oregonians his
filled out two forms: a rental application and Supporters appear to have two goals: nomic opportunity. priority. Each of bis four plans so far- on
my lease. racial justice and environmental advocacy. education, healthcare, homelessness and
I disagree with theideaofusingaschool I agree with both objectives and give money Frank Reppe11hagenS, outheast Portland uniting Oregon - has stuck to the com-
as a social-service access poi.nt. And I no and time in support of both. Racial dispar mon theme of improving people's lives in
longer have faith in the Portland agen- ities in income and other outcomes are bad Terryf or Washington situations like Oregon's failing schools and
cies that have run homeless people in cir and getting worse. The achievement gap is Countyc hair increasing homeless population. Oregon
cles for years. They've had their chance. If widening across most groups when com needs better leadership on these issues.
they were worth the money granted them pared to whites, and the problem is espe We have a choice for Washington County J have never endorsed any candidate for
every year, Portland's homeless population cially acute for African American males. commission cha.ir, and it's an easy one. Bob any position. But I'm going to bat for Knute
wouldn't be what it is now. We need more solutions supporting upward Terry has worked diligently for years 10 because he will work to represent all of the
Instead of throwing money at the local social mobility, but weather stripping and maintain Washington County's position as people of the state. At a time when politics
social-service agencies and throwing a lit solar panels are not it. Research suggests the driving engine of the economy forthe is so polarized, Knute Buehler is the kind of
when nothing works out, get in and deal more impactful factors include access to entire state, nurturing our enviable reputa governor we need in Oregon.
with a homeless person on your own. You preschool, better schools, stronger neigh tion as livable and welcoming.
don't need to install showers in a school borhoods and access to nearby jobs. His stewardship to organizations, bus!- Ann Bakke11se1S1o, m/11vesPt ortland
Share your opinion
Letters: Limitt o 250 wordsa nd submitt o letters@oregonlan.comCo. mmentaries:S ubmit6 00-800 wordst o commentary@oregonian.coImnc. ludey ourh omea ddressa nd phonen umberf or verification.
Submissionsm ay alsob e malledt o OregonianO pinlon.1500S W FirstA ve. . Suite4 00, PortlandO, R9 7201.A lls ubmissionsb ecomet he propertyo f The Oregoniana nd will not be returned.S ubmissionms ay be
editeda nd may be publishedo r otherwiseu sed in any medium.R eache ditorL auraG undersona t 503·221·8378 or lgunderson@oregonian.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.