Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Oct 28, 2018 · Page B2
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159234123/
B2 SUNDAY. OCTOBER 28, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
THEP ALLBEARERS
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR Chavez-DeRemer'sleadership Where's the transparency? communities of color, and work to address
environmental and energy challenges. We
Why does Walden support arson? erodes Happy Valley It certainly had the illusion of politics understand our needs and have proposed a
As a longtime resident of Happy Val· to delay releasing school performance rat carefully crafted measure to benefit all Port•
I was dismayed to hear Rep. Greg Walden ley, I found the Oct. 17e ndorsement of Lori ings until after the election ("Kare Brown landers. Please join me in voting "yes" on
condonet he act or arson whenh e advocated Chavez-DeRemer to be shortsighted to say appointee delays release of school ratings to Measure 26-201.
for the pardon of Dwight and Steven Ham the least. You touted her support or devel post-election," Oct. 24). The excuse was that
mond. My problem is not with the pardon opers as mayor of Happy Valley as though Oregon schools chief Colt Gill didn't feel Shannon Singleton, Northeast Portland
for an overly harsh sentence. My problem is that were a good thing. She has enabled comfortable releasing the profiles. ls that Singlecon is execulivedirectorof JOIN, a 11011-
Walden dismissed this crime as a •·manage overdevelopmem. loosenlngenvironmen perhaps because they don't renect favor profit that supports Portland's homelessc om
ment tooL"This fire burned 139a cres of fed tal standards to allow more development ably on his boss, Gov. Brown, who appointed munity.
eral land near Bureau of Land Management into sensitive areas. She is a mayor for the him to his position? A former boss of mine
firefighters. I have friends who serve as fire developers, not the citizens of Happy Val always told me, "Give me the bad news early Dorothy Merritt brings
fighters and their lives are put in danger by ley. Happy Valley Is not a better place to live - we can deal with it." Sounds like the bad professionalism to politics
arson. My wife and several friends put their because of the development of a McMansion news did in fact come early, but it was so
lives in danger to help rescue the 160 hikers subdivision on Scouter's Mountain. This bad that Brown didn't want it out before the I am writing this letter or recommenda
crapped by the Eagle Creek Fire. Arson is not was not popular with the people in the area. election. tion for Dorothy Merritt, running for the
a managementt ool. Erosion control often goes by the wayside Oregon House of Representatives in Dis
because or her ramming through develop Peter York, Lake Oswego trict 30. She is a conservative Republican
Ro,i Martin, Hood River er-friendly regulations. Chavez-DeRemer's who believes in the U.S. Constitution as it
actions as mayor are one of many reasons to Portland Clean Energy is written. I have known Merritt for over
Rep. Walden endorsement vote for Rep. Janelle Bynum. Initiative helps housing crisis 40 years. She and her husband Hal have
a disappointment six grown children. Merritt worked rearing
Lynn Spilaleri Handlin, Happy Valley The best way to prevent homelessness her children and then as a successful real
The Oregonian/OregonLive Editorial is to make housing more affordable. Mea estate agent. As a real estate agent, she rep
Board endorsement of Rep. Greg Walden Is Brown, Buehler and sure 26-201. the Portland Clean Energy resented clients and worked within the legal
extremely disappointing. Despite a 2008 climate change Initiative. will lower the cost of living ror boundaries of the law while staying within
campaign pledge to make health insur low•income Port landers at imminent risk of her principles and beliefs. I know those
ance more affordable and more available, The Oct. 22 article. "Kate Brown, Knute homelessness. It will make Portland more same traits and principles will lead her to be
Walden-at least five times-voted to Buehler find little common ground on cli affordable for those who need it most. a successful representative for the people of
deny health care coverage ror Oregon's mate change," really missed the mark by Through my work in homelessness Inter Oregon.
low-income children. In 2009, the program summing up the differences between Gov. vention, I see Portlanders lose housing She has been involved with the Repub·
he opposed awarded more than S31 mil- Kate Brown and Rep. Knute Buehler on cli with their inability to pay rising rents and lican Party as a precinct committee per
lion to Oregon community health centers. mate change as a disagreement about actions sky-high Ulliily bills. Lowering the COSoI f son and other supportive activities. She Is
These centers were then able to provide to take. Reading a comparison of their electric bills through weatherization and endorsed by former Rep. Shawn Lindsay,
health care to an additional 70,000 low-in records, it's clear the fundamental differ renewable energy will help keep people current Rep. Rich Vial and Washington
come kids. Because of these gains, the U.S. ence is that Brown has provided strong lead housed. County Commissioner Bob Terry.
Department of Health and Human Services ership to fight carbon pollution on several Opponents of Measure 26-201, funded While she lacks experience as a legisla
awarded Oregon an additional bonus or fronts while all Buehler has accomplished by the large corporations that would pay tor, Dorothy's ability to enter into new rela
more than $.15m illion in early 201.1.M ean is a single "yes" vote and a lot or naysay- the modest one percent surcharge to fund tionships with new people is old hat. She
while Walden's only accomplishment has ing. He has not offered a single initiative or the initiative, misleadingly claim we relishes the opportunity to serve her con
been more than SO Inane votes to repeal or piece of legislation on this critical Issue. It Is shou Id focus on housing and homeless stituents and has stated her first order of
defund The Patient Protection and Afford notable that Bueh !er acknowledges human ness rather than invest in clean energy, business will be to determine the needs of
able Care Act. caused climate change- something nearly weatherization and creating good-paying those Oregon citizens residing within her
Walden has clearly demonstrated he every other Republican refuses todo despite jobs. This either-or scenario has no basis district.
believes health care is merely a commod mountains of legitimate scient Ifiee vidence. In reality. The Portland Clean Energy Ini She also strongly believes our children
ity, available only for those who can afford But as is obvious from his record, or really tiative does all of the above and will com are our future and their education and
it. More shamefully, he contend-. health care his lack of a record, that doesn't qualify him plement Measure 102 and Measure 26-199, opportunities for growth and development
should be available only for those children to take on this most serious of threats toOre offering a more comprehensive solution is paramount.
with rich parents. As the Oct. 24 endorse gon·s health and economy. Brown's strong to Portland's housing and homelessness I cannot more highly recommend Doro
ment states, "Walden's constituents deserve record of action demonstrates she is the crisis. thy Merritt as your representative in House
better." leader we need to take on climate change. The Portland Clean Energy Initiative was District 30.
created by a broad coalition of organiza
Larry Tibbles, Heppner carr/e Pil/11/psC, orva/11s tions that serve low-income Portlanders and Slepha11J . Vrtlska, Hillsboro
Share your opinion
Letters: Limit to 250 words and submit to letters@oregonian.com. Commentaries: Submit 600-800 words to commentary@oregonian.com. Include your home address and phone number for verification.
Submissions may also be malled to Oregonian Opinlon.1500 SW Flrst Ave. . Suite 400, Portland, OR 97201. All submissions become the property of The Oregonian and will not be ret u med. Submissions may be
edited and may be published or otherwise used in any medium. Reach editor Laura Gunderson at 503·221-8378 or lgunderson@oregonian.com
301
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.