Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Feb 28, 2019 at 9:56 am
Rep. Hernandez Files Bill to Disarm Cops on PSU
and UO Campuses
ALEX ZIELINSKI
1536875155-gettyimages-893140968-draftfolio.jpg
DRAFTFOLIO / GETTY IMAGES
The call to disarm Portland State University (PSU) cops has reached the
Oregon Capitol.
This morning, Portland Rep. Diego Hernandez introduced House Bill 3338, a
bill that would bar police at public universities—located in Oregon cities
with a population exceeding 150,000—from carrying firearms. These
restrictions mean the bill would directly apply to PSU and the University of
Oregon (UO).
“This bill is about making students at our university campuses safer,”
Hernandez said in a Thursday morning press release. “The fact of the matter
is students at both campuses have said time and time again they do not
want armed police on their campus."
Hernandez' bill follows two highly publicized (and criticized) incidents
involving campus cops in 2018: The June shooting death of 45-year-old
Jason Washington by two PSU officers and UO officers' decision to point
their guns at a student of color they believed was a suspect in a petty crime
(despite the suspect being reported as white).
Hernandez cites both incidents in his press release.
The bill doesn't completely bar firearms from campus police squads—it
would allow campus cops to carry guns inside police headquarters, but not
outside the department.
The legislation is a proposed amendment to a state law that already defines
the roles and responsibilities of campus police departments. If passed by
the state legislature, this new rule would go into effect on January 1, 2020.
HB 3338 has the backing of PSU students groups—including the anti-gun
organization Disarm PSU, which was founded when PSU's Board of
Directors first voted to arm its campus cops in 2014.
“For four years PSU communities have spoken up saying they want an
unarmed campus,” said Camilo Abreu Assad, a member of PSU student
government member and DisarmPSU, in Hernandez' press release. “Here
we have the opportunity to address the injustice of those whose lives have
already been lost to police violence on campus. Here we can prevent the
further militarization of our campuses at the expense of students. We can
undo the mistake of giving university presidents, unelected officials without
public accountability, the authority to command armed police
departments.”
The bill's introduction comes less than a week after PSU released a lengthy
independent report—triggered by the death of Washington—that argued in
favor of keeping PSU cops armed. The report was poorly received by student
groups, a population whose concerns Hernandez says are reflected in HB
3338.
"Sound policy has to come from and center the communities impacted,"
Hernandez said, "and it’s time we listen to students.”
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 1     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Portland Responds to SNAP Shutdown Delays and Funding Cuts: Resources to Use and
Support
Legacy Health Staff Say They’ll Stay on Strike Until Company Offers Better Deal
Trump Stymied Again; Appeals Court Will Rehear Oregon’s National Guard Deployment
Case
372 Multnomah County Residents Died While Homeless in 2024
Portland's Most Effective Channel For Addressing Community Concerns is a Back Door
Judge: No National Guard in Oregon, For Now
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Goodbye Boris, Hello Gentleminions!
Take Our Sassy-Ass Trivia Quiz About Exploding Whales, Vanishing Beer Fests, and...
What Are We Doing with Your Dead Body?
THE TRASH REPORT: Brawls, Body Parts, and Catastrophic... Something
Love Our New "Say Nice Things About Portland" Guide? Want MORE?? Consider a Small
Contribution!
POP QUIZ PDX: Get In, Losers... We're Going Shopping!
A Decade After Federal Directives, Portland Police Will Start Using Body Cameras Full-
Time
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286