Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sat, Sep 1, 2018 · Page A11
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1222748458/
THE OREGONIAN All
Opinion
IN MY OPINION LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Portland's chance for Buehlert he best choice for students
As a Portland Public School high school junior, I've seen
corporate accountability how a lack of investment in Oregon's children can really
hurt our schools. Rep. Knute Buehler is the only candidate
for governor with a serious plan to make sure the money
being spent on education In Salem Is actually reaching
students. Lnsufficient resources for students has led to a
lower graduation rate for high schoolers like me, rank-
ing Oregon 48th nationwide. If we elect Buehler as gover
nor. he will help raise our graduation rates by focu Ing on
neglected areas, such as career technical education.
Gov. Kate Brown has let the Public Employees Retire
ment System problem spiral into a crisis draining extreme
amounts from Oregon·s budget. and has left our state
$22 billion in the hole. Buehler will direct more money to
classrooms and reform PERS, which could lead to $1.2b il
lion more going to students annually.
For Oregon students, the choice couldn't be more clear.
Buehler has made a real commitment to fighting for us,
and it's time we elect a governor who really cares.
BenS nead,N ortheast Portland
Prepaidb allots save all voters money
To Elizabeth Hovde ("Geto ut the vote? Not without knowl
edge," Aug. 26), if you mail in your postpaid Washington bal
lot without a stamp, the money you paid in taxes-36 cents
per registered voter- is essentially refunded to you with a
14-cent bonus. The only reason forobjecting to prepaid post
age is because you don't want the poor to exercise the right to
vote. Covering half a page with ink won't hide the truth.
Chris Carvalho, Aloha
can't install an old road with new tolls
I have been amazed concerning the toll booths. They
are usual.ly installed when a new road is created. Now is
the time to put in a much-needed bypass. Then the city
The Rev. E.D. Mondaine writes that he supports a ballot measure that would ensure that big-money corporations are a part can put in all the toll booths it wants so the politicians can
of the solution In lhe commuolcy~sw ork to address climate change. Dave Killen, staff fill their pockets once more.
Suza1111Fel oyd, Beaverton
E.D. Mondaine people and planet. Funds will go toward communi
ty-based projects that reduce Portland's greenhouse It is not what it is
The Great Global Heatwave of 2018 gives us an gas emissions and concurrently promote social jus
urgent reminder to mea.ningfully act on climate tice for those who bear the greatest burdens on the People should not be so confused by Rudy Giuliani's
change. Surveying this problem through the lens of front lines of climate change. statement, "Truth isn't truth," in this post-modern soci
social justice, this burden should not bear down on The mega-corporations targeted through the ety In which what I say does not mean what It meant to
individual climate action to reduce our collective Portland Clean Energy Fund can and should pay. me when I said it, but rather what it means to you when
carbon footprint. We're not talking about mom and pop shops. you hear it. That's how we got to the point where we can't
Do not mistake me for dismissing those who hold These nationwide retail businesses just benefited determine what "is," is.
a conviction to reduce their personal carbon foot from the largest one-time reduction of the corporate
print. Nevertheless, I implore Portlanders to priori tax rate in history-down from 35 percent to 21 per Dayton Turner, SoutheastP ortland
tize community-wide systems change first and fore· cent - through the Republican-driven Tax Cuts and
most. Jobs Act. Whenw ill enough be enough?
Corporate accountability is a necessary Ingredi Some of these corporations take advantage of
ent in this process. shady methods, such as offshore tax havens to hide A coward.ly, traitorous president doesn't even have the
I grew up in St. Louis, Missouri, in the shadow of their true profits. More than ever, corporate exec decency or strength of character to have the flags at the
chemical factories that rained ash down on me. I was utives and shareholders are flush with cash. One White House nown at half-mast for a U.S. senator and
frequently out of school as a child due to asthmatic might expect that workers would get raises, but not American hero- an honor bestowed on others who have
attacks and visits to the hospital. Childhood friends surprisingly, this hasn't proven to be the case. passed -for more than a weekend. When will President
died premature deaths due to pulmonary disease Now is the time for our society to do some serious Donald Trump go too far? When will the American people
and other harsh fates. soul-searching on the foundations of our capitalist finally realize our country is being run by the worst presi
Like these manufacturers, billionaire retail cor society. dent ever? Impeach the fat slob.
porations also forsake the health of our people and We must change our definition of success to eco
planet through long supply chains, cheap produc logical and social well-being, not the concentra Gary L. Hollen, Salem
tion quality and exploitation of workers. It's high tion of wealth and power. Billionaire corporations
time big business does its part to support commu have gained their wealth through unsustainable
nities of color and low-income people by paying for extraction of natural resources and exploitation of
these climate injustices that occur locally and world workers worldwide. Share your opinion
wide. We have an unprecedented opportunity now to
We, the people of Portland, have the power to hold help them regain their civic soul. Letters: Limitt o 250 words and submit to letters@oregonian.
these mega-corporations accountable this Novem Please join me this November with a resounding com. Commentaries: Submit 600-800 words to commentary@
ber through the Portland Clean Energy Fund ballot affirmative vote for the Portland Clean Energy Fund. oregonian.com.I ncludey our home address and phone number
measure. for verificationS. ubmissions may also be mailed to Oregonian
Through a I percent surcharge on ail Port The Rev.E .D. Mo11dal11Ise a chlefpeillio11erofihe Opinion.1500S WF irstA ve.. Suite 400. Portland.O R9 7201.
land-based revenue, national billionaire corpora Portland Clean Energy Fund ballot measure.H e Alls ubmissions become the property of The Oregoniana nd
tions will take the first steps toward paying their is £hep astor of Ce/ebra!/01T1 abernacleC hurch in willn ot be returnee. Submissionsm ay be ecited and may be
fair share in order to mitigate the damaging conse North Portland and presidem ofihe NAACPP ort published or otherwise used in any medium. Reach editor Laura
quences of business practices that elevate profit over land Branch. Gundersona t 503-221-8378o r lgunderson@oregonlan.com
mJ
~he ®regonian Founded December 4, 1850. Established as a EDITORIALB OARD CONTACT
daily February 4, 1861.T he Sunday Oregonian John F. Maher, President Laura Gunderson, commentary@oregornan.com
OREGON LIVE established December 4, 1881.I ncorporating Therese Bottomly, Editorial Pages Editor letters@oregonian.com
OREGONIAN MEDIA GROUP the Oregon Journal since 1982. Editor (interim) Helen Jung, Associate Editor
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.