Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Dec 26, 2018 · Page A16
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1158997719/
A16 WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 26, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR NW Innovation Works,w ants to use fracked
gas to make methanol and ship it to China to
Trump's simplistic revenge make plastics and fuel. Despite the compa
ny's preposterous claim that it would benefit
Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis, who our climate, this methanol refinery would
gave two months of honest, thoughtful consume a stunning amount of fracked gas;
and constructivelyi nspired notice of his as much as 320 million cubic feet per day,
resignation,w as instead told to clean out more than every gas-fired power plant in
his desk immediately by President Donald Washington combined. This project would
Trump ("Mattis will depart Jan, 1, deputy derail goals to reduce greenhouse gas. The
will be secretary," Dec. 23). The president, company also proposes a second methanol
apparentlyu nconcerned about whatever refinery near Clatskanie.
turmoil his petulant actions cause here, Now is the time to speak out and oppose
has once again (and again and again and the Kalama methanol refinery. Public com
again) made the issue of Mattis' resignation ments are accepted only until Friday. Please
all about himself. While Mattis respect call Gov. Jay lnslee, 360-902-4111, and
fully implied that the president would be Washington Department ofEcology South
better served by someone more in line west Regional Director Sally Toteff, 360-
with his own thinking, Mr. Trump figured 407-6300. Visit www.columbiariverkeeper.
otherwise, decided he was being publicly org for more information.
insulted, and heedless of thrusting the
defense establishment into upheaval, acted Deena T. Grossman, Porlland
like a child seeking simplistic revenge.
Our president. who is blatantly narcis Earthquake warnings necessary
sistic,c ontinuest o let this behaviorg uide
his thinking and subsequent actions. Com The owners of old masonry buildings
bined with his continuous fact-mauling in Portland who are whining about the
outbursts and his disturbing disregard for expectation of reinforcing their properties
detailed information,w e have had a com and posting warnings appear to be clue-
mander-in-chlef for two years now wbo less about what will happen during a large
exhibits little interest and ability in respon earthquake ("Portland's earthquake warn-
sible governance and who shows absolutely ; ng ordinance spurs lawsuit by owners of
no proclivity toward ever ..g rowing into the brick buildings," Dec.20).1 saw firsthand
job." such horrific damage resulting from the
1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in the Bay
Mark Thomas, Portland Area. Falling masonry did injure and kill
people. Fortunately, city and state leaders
Continuing Hillsboro previously had the foresight to proactively
Grange's legacy require reinforcementa nd retrofitting, or
there likely may have been hundreds of
rd like tooffersomeclarityandobser deaths. If such a quake were to happen here,
vations on the no-win situation Hillsboro the death and injury counts would likely
Grange encountered as reported In The Ore be staggering, and these building owners
gonian/Oregon Live ("As sovereign citizens would be left holding the bag, since their
take the mic at Hillsboro Grange, commu llablllty Insurance probably won't cover
nity leaders sound an alarm," Dec. 7). earthquake damage. And trying to use the
The 15 current Hillsboro members con First Amendment to escapep ostingt hat
sideredt heir resources-or lack thereof their buildings could be dangerous probably
- when reviewing the applications of 25 won't hold up In court, as the warnings on
new people itito the Grange. Accepting new their own chapter. Despite stumbles, the contact your Oregon legislators with the tobacco products and cancer-causing con
membersm eans more than just sayingw el Grange in Oregon is growing, and we hope same goals for this bill. Even more, ask tents in California demonstrate. Yes, they
come. It means mentoring new Grangers thosec ommitted to bettering their commu your members of Congress- Reps. Earl can require you to post suchw arnings, as
about their commitment to meet certain nity and serving as advocatesf or food secu Blumenauer,S uzanne Bonamici, Greg any competenta ttorney will advise.
expectations - accepting that faith, hope, rity will join with us, with patience, to con Walden and Washington Rep. Jaime Her These owners seem to be demonstrating
charity and fidelity are our cornerstones tinue our legacya nd set coursef or our next rera Beutler - to support the recently intro· callous disregard for their tenants and the
and encouraginga marketplaceo f free 151y ears. duced bipartisan Energy Innovation and citizens of Portland by trying to shirk their
ideas,t olerancea nd civility, all while living Carbon Dividend Act. This congressional legal and mora.lr esponsibilityt o ensure
In a society that is bitterly divided, similar Susan Noah is presidem of the Oregon Stale bill would be effective at reducing car- that their buildings are safe not only for
to that of the time ofour founding afterthe Grange. bon pollution by more than 40 percent in their tenants, but others who might be in
Civil War. The current social and political 12 years. It's good for people- improving harm's way during a large quake. Perhaps
climate has made clear we must take this Put a price on pollution health and saving lives by reducing pollu their efforts should Instead be focused on
mentoring more seriously even than recent tion Americans breathe. Best of all, it's good working with state and city leaders to find
generationsp ast ifwe are to hold true to our In the Dec.16 story- "Will 2019 be the for the economy, creating 2.1 mi!Hon addi wayst o make reinforcementa ffordable
151-yearl egacy. Accepting the two dozen year Oregon gets climate change bill to fin tional jobs over the next IOy ears. you know, be proactive and responsible. Be
candidates would have meant denying their ish line?• -The Oregonian/Oregon Live adults.
responsibility as Grange members, some wrote about the heavy lift it will take for the Brian EU/i11g,P ortland
thing they felt they could not do. Clean Energy Jobs bill to be voted on and Stephen Mayer, Newberg
In addition, because many of the appli passed in the upcoming 2019 Oregon legis Speak out against
cants are associatedw ith another estab lative session. Clean Energy Jobs is a policy methanol project Border wall a new Berlin wall
lished community organization - and to put a limit and price on climate pollu
if they chose to, could leverage their new tion from the largest polluters in the state. In the Dec. 15a rticle, "Oregon falls well Why isn't anybody comparing President
membershipt o seizec ontrol of the Grange It would secureg reenhouseg as reductions short of greenhouseg as reductiong oals," Donald Trump's border wall to the horrible
Hall - the Hillsboro members were also and reinvestmenti nto communities across reporter Ted Sickinger refers to the Oregon Berlin Wall - built by the communist East
compelled to act as guardians of the build Oregon to create clean energy jobs and a Global Warming Commission report, writ· German authorities to stop East Germans
ing. It is an asset built from tbe charitable thriving economy, especially in communi ing that "the effects of climate change are migrating to democracy in West Berlin?
and hard workofmembersovergenerations ties that need it most. seriousa nd are costingO regoniansm oney Why isn't everybody asking, "Why do you
meant to stand for this and future genera I recently asked my Oregon legisla- and affecting their lifestyles and health." In want our money when you told us so many
tions to use in service to their community. tors, Rep. Diego Hernandez and sen.-elect light of this, au ofusin the Pacific North times Mexico would pay for this wall? All
There is no doubt that many of those who Shemia Fagan ro support a strong Clean west must opposec onstructiono f the you'vee ver given us is lies."A nd remember,
applied for membership would be wonder Energy Jobs bill with no industry give world's largest methanol refinery 30 miles NAFTA has nothing to do with this.
ful additions to Hillsboro Grange orthe aways, strong interim goals and grounded from Portland in Kalama, Washington.
Grange as a whole should they wish to start In equity for low-income Oregonians. Please A Chinese governmem-backed company, Jolin Marshall, Nehalem
Share your opinion
Letters:U mit to 250 wordsa nds ubmitt o letters@oregonian.coCmo.m mentaries:S ubmit6 00-800 wordst o commentary@oregonian.coInmc.l udey ourh omea ddressa nd phonen umberf or verification.
Submissionsm ay also be malledt o OregonianO pinion1, 500 SWF irstA ve.. Suite 400, Portland,O R9 7201. Alls ubmissionsb ecome the propertyo f The Oregoniana nd willn ot be returned. Submissionsm ay be
editeda nd mayb e publishedo r otherwiseu sedi n any medium.R eache ditorL auraG undersona t 503-221·8378o r lgunderson@oregornan.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.