Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Oct 24, 2018 · Page A20
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1159233491/
A20 WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Reader views
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR ble steering around case law regarding free
speech and freedom of assembly. The right
Local actions, global warming to assemble and free speech are not abso•
lute, otherwise protesters could assemble and
Global warming Is here. If countries around legally shut down a freeway without a per
Lhew orld do not take decisive steps now, chil mit, which has sometimes happened-1-S in
dren and grandchildren will likely suffer from Seattle during the Vietnam War, for exam
the devastating effects of a 2.5-degree Celsius ple. The city issues permits for assemblies in
Increase in global temperature. Nations can parks and other venues, and even for street
take two major actions to slow global wam1- closures. If the city can control the location,
ing: transitioning to clean energy and chang why can't they issue permits that separate
ing forest policy co keep our remaining green events regardless or ideology? Certainly such
canopy Intact. Ona local level. we can vote for separation Is advised 1ro ne assembly Is for a
Measure 26-201.t he Pon land Clean Energy loud music event and another is for chamber
Community Benefits Initiative that would music outside. If violations of a permit occur
enact a 1p ercent surcharge tax on the sales of from any group, why can't police then shut
retailers with U.S.g ross revenue over S1b il down an event for one or several groups in
lion and Portland revenue overSS00,000. In safe, reasonable enforcement in the interest
regard to our green canopy, we can write and of public safety and protection of property?
call the Oregon Board of Forestry and insist on
policy to reduce concentration or heat-trap Gary Kruger. Southwest Porlland
pinggases in the atmosphere. We ask for
less reliance on clear-cutting by pursuing an Astoria Police has it right
operating plan that increases rotation ages,
thereby leaving mature forests to sequester In response to: Bethany Barnes' article
carbon dioxide much more effectively than "On Hold: Crime victims, public wait 6 weeks
smaller, younger trees. or more for Portland police reports" (Oct. 21):
I was in an auto accident last week in Astoria.
GregJ acob,H Iilsboro An Astoria Police Department officer was at
the scene within minutes and was gathering
Where ambivalence can lead information as I was being taken to the hos·
pita! by ambulance. Later, he came to visit
The Oct. 21 article, "Feminist advocate me in the hospital, sat with me for a while,
to bipartisan compromiser: Kate Brown's gave me his card and wished me well.
24-year path to governor," observed Oregon l did not ask him for further assistance,
voters seem co be ambivalent about re-elect· but a week lacer he sent me a copy of his
Ing Gov. Kate Brown, report and a blank OMVa ccident report
Voters might remember that many were for me to complete. This was sent certified
also ambivalent about electing Hillary Clin mail at the cost ofS6.91. Needless to say, I
ton, and they now consider the result of that was taken aback by the immense contrast
election a national and global disaster. between my experience and what Barnes
uncovered in Sunday's article about Portland
Jolt11K ovash, Lake Oswego Police Bureau record request delays and rees.
The Astoria Police Department has it
Starnes deserves coverage right. I am glad my accident did not happen
here at home. Maybe 1·11m ove to Astoria
Media outlets have done well in trying to when I retire.
hide the fact that Patrick Starnes is running
as an Independent candidate for Oregon Is the market responding to skyrocketing suggested the tax would be passed on to Mark T. Johnson. Northwest Portland
governor. However, many people are well rents caused by demand for housing far out consumers, the City Club report found no
aware he was not allowed in the candidate stripping supply. If allowed to continue, this evidence of this happening in response to A 'no' on Measure 106
debates. They may not be happy about that. is the best way to stabilize rents. A supply taxes at the level of municipalities.
I am certainly not. Starnes deserves che surplus would force property owners to cur Beyond its one-sidedness, the board I applaud The Oregonlan/OregonLlve
publicity as much as Gov. Kate Brown and tail rent increases and even reduce them to insults the intelligence of low-income and Editorial Board's support for a "no" vote on
Rep. Knute Buehler. We all deserve a chance lure tenants. This has already begun to hap· other marginalized communities by pater Measure 106 ("No on 106. Trust Oregonians
to make an intelligent choice when we vote pen here and in Sean le. nalisticallysuggestingthe board's mem to choose their health care," Sept. 30). As a
next month. Please give us the information Enter the city government, whose solu bers and large corporations know what's pro-choice Catholic woman and mother, I
we need to make that possible. tion is to force apartment developers to best for low-income and other marginalized believe we must understand what's at stake
set aside a significant percentage of their people, rather than the people living those in this debate. Measure 106 is a back-door
ArleneJohmton, Southeast Portland units forsubmarket races. This manipula experiences. This initiative was drafted by a ban on abortion that would hurt our state's
tion of the real estate market has caused a coalition of organizations representing the most underserved communities. Measure
Governor's seat not for sale near halt in new apartment building per most marginalized people in our society, 106 goes against the basic principles of fair·
mits. The result will be far less supply than who know what enormous burdens soaring ness and social justice Catholics hold dear.
I resent that wealthy individuals like Nike would have occurred had these bureaucrats energy costs have become for their commu By denying coverage for abortions to those
co-founder Phil Knight are allowed to con Just let market forces work. They apparently nities. It Is abhorrent to suggest large corpo with Medicaid or a state-sponsored Insur
tribute so much money to political candidates learned very little in Economics 101.s o I'm rations opposing the initiative know better ance plan, it would simply punish those who
like Rep. Knute Buehler("Phil Knight ups ante willing to bet they will double down by call than oppressed communities what will help rely on these programs. That is just not righL
with another Sl miUion for Knute Buehler," ing for outright rent controls- a solution or hurt them most. The notion these initia I am honored to serve the great city of
Oct.18). Unlike Knight, I am not wealthy; that would leave us with chronic housing tive opponents and their analysts even care Gresham, and I know many In my commu
I can afford to give only a small amount to shortages for years to come. about oppressed communities Is ridicu· nity rely on Medicaid for their health care.
Gov. Kate Brown. We need campaign finance lous. I urge voters to join me and invest in They deserve equal protection under the
reform in our state and in this country. Knight John Fraser, Nonlleasc Portland our community by voting "yes" on Measure law- including equal access to the repro
shouldn't have a greater say in backing can 26-201, the Portland Clean Energy Initiative. ductive care they need.
didates. I wonder how Buehler. the supposed 'Yes' on clean energy measure I trust Oregon women to make their own
moderate Republican, stands on that issue? Chrisla vo11B ehren, Northeast Porlland ethical choices about when, whether and
Don't let Knight buy the Oregon governor's I am very disappointed in The Orego how to have children. And I know I'm not
race. Brown cares about Oregon values, not nlan/OregonLive Editorial Board's poor Right to speech not absolute alone in my position - more than 60 percent
wealthy donors. Re-elect Gov. Kate Brown. analysis of the Portland Clean Energy lni· of U.S. Catholics believe abortion should be
tiative ("Vote 'no' on Portland clean energy I see Mayor Ted Wheeler is formulating an legal; six in 10 U.S. Catholic voters say that
Irene Henjum, Springfield fund measure," Oct. 20). The analysis is ordinance to allow authority to control street abortion can be a moral choice. I am commit·
one-sided, considering the opponent-com protests before they turn violent. I also under ted to my constituents and my community,
Economics 101i n rental market missioned report by ECONorthwest, but stand there are First Amendment rights to and I stand against Measure 106.
with no mention of the City Club of Portland consider. The OcL 15 article, "In response to
You can't help but notice apartment report, which came to very different con chaotic street brawls, Portland may restrict Carla C. Piluso, Gresham (a slate
buildings springing up all over town. This clusions. While the ECONorthwest report protests," mentioned the city is havlngtrou- represemaclve lO clle Oregon House)
Share your opinion
letters: Limit to 250 words and submit to letters@oregonian.com. Commentaries: Submit GCX)-800w ords to commentary@oregonian.com. Include your home address and phone number for verification.
Submissions may also be malled to Oregonian Opinion. 1500 SWF lrst Ave. . Suite 400, Portland, OR 97201. All submissions become the property of The Oregonian and will not be retumed. Submissions may be
edited and may be published or otherwise used in any medium. Reach editor Laura Gunderson at 503·221-8378 or lgunderson@oregonian.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.