Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Feb 7, 2018 · Page A17
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1224621748/
THE OREGONIAN WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2018 Al7
IN MY OPINION IN OUR OPINION
Scathingc hild welfarea udit Pass CleanE nergy
Jobs bills to unleash
no surprisef orf osterp arents
businessi nnovation
Merritt Paulson and Kate Gordon
This legislative session. Oregon faces an enormous
economic and environmental opportunity: the potential
to cap and price carbon pollution. The proposed Clean
Energy Jobs bills put a price on carbon pollution from the
largest emitters in Oregon, and reinvest the proceeds into
our economy and communities. At the state level, this will
unleash Oregon innovation and create high-quality jobs in
both rural and urban areas. At a much larger scale, it will
put our small state in a front-runner position in the global
race to curb climate change by building a new low•carbon
economy.
Some have asked why now, and why Oregon? We both
have spent years working with businesses at the local
and global scale and to us, the answer is simple, Climate
change is a global problem with profoundly local economic
impacts. Witness our recent wildfires and the stress they
have put on our timber Industry, or the ocean acidification
that's hammering our fisheries.
On the flip side, Oregon is in a prime position to create
and trade the kinds of low-carbon technologies and mate
rials that can help stem the tide of global climate change.
We're famous for our trees - the Timbers are named for
them - and after all, they're the best carbon removal tech
nologies in the world. They're also the source of a hot new
building material, cross-laminated timber, which is replac
ing steel and concrete In states and countries that are seri
ous about carbon reduction. But Oregon has to act now to
reduce climate risk and to capture these economic oppor
tunities.
From a business perspective, putting a price on carbon
pollution is the single best way to signal the presence of
a long-term, stable and consistent market for low-carbon
products. It also lets companies know they will literally pay
the price for not embracing best-in·class energy efficiency
and renewable energy measures.
Even better for business is the fact that Oregon's car
The author, at right, argues that he and his husband, Ben West, left, found the number of cases that state foster-care work bon price would be part of a larger regional market includ
ers had to juggle to be a stumbling block to the care thar kids were provided. Stephanie Yao Long, 2014 ing California, Ontario and Quebec, with Washington and
other western states likely to join in the near future. Not to
mention the Asian markets, including China and Japan,
Paul Rummell Generally. we felt some caseworkers seemed apathetic that also price carbon, and to which Oregon has prime
because they were overloaded with cases. It seemed com access through the Port of Portland.
The results of the Oregon foster-care system audit are in, monplace for them to promise care or assistance, but not Across the United States, 10 states already have suc
and they are more horrific than anyone could Imagine - follow through. On many occasions, caseworkers were dis cessful cap and invest systems in place. ln those states,
unless you work in or with foster care. For those of us who honest, promising things they couldn't provide to placate economies are growing, emissions are falling and thou·
have seen firsthand the staff turnover, low morale and non us, as foster parents. This created animosity and distrust. sands of people are working in the clean energy sector.
existent support for foster parents, the audit serves as recog We also saw the agency push to reunify foster children Energy prices are stable thanks to the declining costs of
nition, finally, of the dire circumstances our most vulnerable with their families, even when workers admitted the fam renewable energy and the money saved through energy
population must contend with if they seek state intervention ilies hadn't ful1y met the criteria for reunification. Due to efficiency measures. And all 10 of those jurisdictions
and protection. lack of funding to ensure compliance with family treat voted in 2017 to extend their programs, in a bipartisan
The findings come as no real surprise to me or my hus ment plans, it was commonplace to send kids back home - fashion.
band. Almost a decade ago, we became foster parents to help only to have them return to DHS in a vicious cycle. With a ln short, building clean energy into all parts ofour econ
an underserved population and to gain experience as par lack of foster care providers and caseworkers, the problems omy makes our businesses more competitive, puts Orego~
ents for when we decided to build our own family. The deci we saw could only have gotten worse. nians to work in a growing sector and positions our state to
sion to become foster parents changed our lives. It set the We decided to quit foster care, becoming another fos be an economic engine in the 21st century. Clean Energy
course for the work we chose, the activism we focused on and ter·care statistic. Once we adopted our son, the best thing Jobs is a business-friendly policy that also guarantees a
ultimately, helped us create the family we now have. for our family was to remove ourselves from the culture of steady ramping down of greenhouse gas emissions In our
But we saw how nawed the Department of Human Ser distrust we'd experienced. We devoted our time to making state. It's market-driven, nexible and allows large emitters
vices' foster-care system is, and the audit findings bear those sure our son finally had the attention he deserved. to find the most affordable and efficient way to reduce their
out. The report highlights three major areas of concern - There is a culture within the agency that needs to emissions.
systemic problems including chronic mismanagement, an change, and that comes from the hlghest levels. Managers At Providence Park, the Timbers strive to embrace sus
insufficient number of available foster families and years resort to bullying their caseworkers to force results. Case tainable products and programs. In doing so, we see the
of understaffing - and makes 24 recommendations. Sim· workers suffer from burnout, leaving fragile and vulnera· rewards. We've seen how reducing our waste and integrat·
ply put, the agency doesn't have enough people to meet the ble children to suffer greater injustice within a system that ing sustainable practices throughout our operations is the
needs of Oregon's children in crisis. is supposed to protect them. right thing to do. It's also a good business move, since it
This has led to an unfathomable downward spiral of attri It is no surprise to us that this important audit was a pri slashes our energy and water bills. Clean Energy Jobs can
tion that itselfisthe reason for a yearly budget drain ofabout ority for Secretary of State Dennis Richardson. Richard make it easier for more businesses to do the right thing and
$28 million. That's what it takes each year to train newly son and his wife adopted their eighth daughter from foster to see the results renected in their bottom line.
hired caseworkers. The ideal would be to retain staff and use care. and his experience resonated with us. We supported Clean Energy Jobs opens the door for Oregon to lead the
the $28 mllllon dollars for Improved programs for children, him In the election because of our belief that he would work transition to a clean energy economy. it can also be a policy
higher payments for foster families, and promotion of foster to reform issues within the system. This audit is aculmina model for other states 10 follow. We're known for our pio
parents. The money also could be used to recruit more case tlon of that work. neering history, and this legislative initiative gives us the
workers to alleviate the load on existing staff. Oregon's children deserve much better and we are happy chance to be pioneers again - in a way that benefits Orego
As foster parents, we found the numberof cases that work that Richardson and his team of auditors have highlighted nians now, and the generations to follow.
ers had to juggle to be a stumbling block to the care that kids areas that need improvement. Let's hope our governor and The sooner that Clean Energy Jobs is in place, the faster
were provided. We had several foster kids placed with us Legislature are listening. With the start of the 2018 legis the investment dollars begin flowing in our state. We can't
who saw their state·assigned case worker less than once a lative session, I really hope our elected officials make our let this opportunity pass us by.
month. One child was deliberately separated from his sib children a priority.
ling, regardless of a policy thallheyshould be kept together. Merritt Paulson Is che ownera11d chief executive officer of
The caseworker, who was close to retiring, didn't seem to Paul Rummell and his husband, Ben \Vest, adopted their the 2015M LS Cup-champion Portland Timbers and the
care that he was ripping two children's lives apart. He made son throughfostercareand wereplaimiffs in a lawsuit rhat 2017 NWSL-champ/011 Portland Thoms FC. Kate Gordon is
false promises that the two would have full visitation oppor successfully challenged Oregon's ban 011s ame-sex marriage. a no11-reside11tfel/owat rhe Columbia Universicy Cemero11
cunities. and then stopped returning our calls. They /Ive in Wilsonville. Global Energy Policy.
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.