Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Wed, Jan 24, 2018 · Page A17
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1224636086/
THE OREGONIAN WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 24. 2018 Al7
Associated Press file
IN MY OPINION
CARBON EMISSIONS BILLS
PRO:C leanE nergyJ obs would create businesses and jobs and CON:C ap-and-trade tens of thousands of dollars of added annual
help people pay for money-saving energy expenses? I can't increase prices to my cus
bill is a victory upgrades. Latino-owned businesses in the proposalu nnecessary tomers because I'm competing with other
clean·energy and energy·efficiency indus states that don't have to pay the tax. I'd lose
for the environment tries would be able to hire more workers, and harmful business. Should I put off investing in more
boosting employment and offering skilled sustainable technology, or cut benefits for
and the economy workersm ore opportunities in this boom to Oregon'se conomy our employees?
ing field. The cap-and-trade proposal also creates
Small business owners in other indus an uncertain future by giving unelected
Diana Nunez tries will benefit as well. The investments Shelly Boshart Davis bureaucrats the authority to raise the car
we can expect from the Clean Energy Jobs bon tax without a vote of the Legislature.
As an advocate for commerce, I wake up program will make renewable energy and "Doing more with less• is a rule I was Make no mistake: Oregon families, farm·
every day thinking of new ways to create energy-efficiency upgrades more afford· taught from a young age growing up on ers and employers are the ones who will
better economic opportunities for Latinos. able for the community. Business owners my family farm in Tangent. Today, tbis pay the tax - more than $50 per month
When this community thrives, all of Oregon save money on energy bills. leaving more value remains present in everything we do by some estimates. Putting a decision on
is better for it. I've seen the power of busi cash on hand to reinvest in their employ on our farm. We invest in technology that the level of the carbon tax into the hands
ness to do good, and there's great potential ees and businesses, or to pass savings on improves efficiencies while reducing our of unelected bureaucrats is a terrible prec
for 21st-century innovation waiting to be to customers. We can accomplish this carbon footprint. For instance, we recently edent to set.
unlocked. while cutting down on climate pollution bought four semi-trucks that will reduce Oregon Is already one of the lowest green
I'm constantly working to bring val that harms our health and the environ emissions,i ncreasef uel efficiencya nd use house-gase mitters in the country,a nd we're
ues, potential and opportunity together. ment. new technology to make our trucks safer on getting lower. In fact, whlle our state's econ
And that's why I'm so excited for the Clean Saving small businessesm oney is an the road. omy and population have grown consider·
Energy Jobs bill In Oregon. It would help Important step toward helping them grow. That's why I am particularly dismayed ably since 2000, our state's greenhouse-gas
make it more lucrative for businessest o do As they grow, they'll create more jobs. And by lawmakers' attempts to pass unneces emissions have declined by 13 percent. Ore
the right thing. That's a win for Oregon's they'il generate a pipeline that offers better sary and harmful legislation that will stifle gon is responsible for a meager 0.7 percent of
communities, businesses and the environ economico pportunitiesf or everyone,f rom my ability to invest in sustainable technol emissions in the United States, and 0.1 per
ment. established professionals to students seek ogy and dramatically increase the cost of cent of global emissions. You could elimi·
The legislation would provide valuable ing internships. Young people will be key running my company. nate the Oregon economy entirely and not
investment dollars in communities that in creating the next generation of sustain The Oregon Legislature's carbon cap make a dent in global greenhouse-gas emis
need it most, kick-starting economic devel able enterprises, and this will offer them a and-trade proposal will extend California's sions.
opment in communitieso f colori n rural and chance to get started now. program to Oregon, which has a completely If the goal is to reduce global emissions,
urban areas that need the boost. The num There's no reason for Oregon to wait. different economy, creating an energy tax then our policy should be to recruit more
ber of Latino-owned businesses in Oregon Our Latino business community has on virtually every critical resource I depend businesses to Oregon- not drive them away.
has Increased more than 300 percent since grown by 250 percent since 2000. Oregon on to run my small, family business. That would ensure that companies and
the early 1990s, generating more than $1.6 has the workforce and the desire to build My business, Boshart Trucking, is small businesses thrive in a clean-energy
billion In revenue. An Infusion of economic new, sustainable Jobs and businesses now involved in every aspect of Oregon's agrl· economy like Oregon's Instead of a high-car
investment will help those numbers con - and we're hungry for opportunities to cultural community, including moving bon-emitting state.
tinue to growa sO regon'sc lean-energye con grow. Clean Energy Jobs will create those product from harvest sites to the ports of More important, that would bring desper
omy grows, too. opportunities, and we will all benefit. 1 Portland, Tacoma and Seattle for export ately needed jobs to rural Oregon, which is
The bill, up for passage by the Legisla work every day to create opportunities for to international markets. Transporting still struggling to build communities with
ture next month, would put a statewide limit growth in our business community, and agricultural product requires hundreds of enough opportunity for families to thrive.
on greenhouse gas emissions that would I'm excited by the prospects this bill offers thousands of gallons of diesel fuel every We should reject California's cap-and-trade
tighten over time. The very largest emitters our state. Wes houldn't let this opportunity year. This legislation wili immediately law and, instead, continue doing things the
in Oregon would be required to pay for per pass by. drive up the cost of fuel by at least 16c ents a Oregon way.
mits for each ton of pollution they put into gallon and skyrocket the cost of electricity
the air. The proceeds would be reinvested Diana Nwiez is pres idem of the Hispanic and natural gas. Howd o legislators propose Shelly Boshart Davis is ihe vice presidelll of
In Oregon's clean-energy economy, which MetropolicanC hamber. that small businesses, UkeB oshart, find the Boshart Trucking. She /Ives In Alba11y.
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.