Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Fri, Feb 9, 2018 · Page A6
by <½a,In cestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1224619455/
A6 FRIDAY. FEBRUARY 9, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
NEWSMAKER LEGISLATURE
Meyer Memorial Trust hires Nonprofitss pending big in
New School dean as CEO
Meyer Memorial Trust named its new
chief executive Thursday- a dean of the advertisingd uel for carbon plan
New School in New Yorkw ho served in the
Obama administration. Michelle DePass will
be the third CEO in the trust's 36-year his
tory, succeeding Doug Stamm, who has run
the organization since 2002 and announced Hillary Borrud their pollution. Oregon would also set a state The two groups are
plans to step down last spring. The trust The Oregonian/Orego,rLive wide limit on greenhouse gas emissions that
chose DePass from 140 applicants. would ratchet down overtime, until i.tr eached dumping money into
Established in 1982.t he trust is named SA LEM - As Oregon lawmakers consider a 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.
for Fred G. Meyer, founder of the Port plan to charge polluters for greenhouse gas This week lawmakers heard testimony on the campaigns even as
land-based grocery chain. It has $800 mil emissions, dueling political nonprofits are two versions of the plan during joint meet
lion in assets and has awarded $761 million spending hundreds of thousands of dollars ings of the Senate and House environment it's unclear whether
ln grants to more ti1an 3,600 organizations. on campaigns to pass or kill the proposal. committees. Senate Bill 1507 and House Bill
Meyer'sw ork focuseso n four areas in A group called Renew Oregon that sup 4001 are scheduled for a work session at 3 Senate Democrats have
Oregon: housing, education, the environ· ports the carbon cap and pricing plan p.m. Monday.
ment and building communities "witha announced Thursday it will spend approx· Both Renew Oregon and Priority Oregon enough votes to pass the
sense of belonging and possibility, regard imately $200,000 to run television and dig are political nonprofits that do not have to
lesso f race or class,"D ePasss aid in a state· ital ads and send out mailers encouraging publicly disclose their donors. Renew Oregon carbon proposal during
ment. "For this to happen and make Ore people to tell lawmakers to support the plan. has been around longer, so basic information
gon an equitable place, we must dismantle Renew Oregon is associated with the Oregon such as its total income in previous years is the short 35-day session.
systemic oppression and have the disci Environmental Council. listed on publicly available tax filings.
pline to ask ourselveso ver and over again: That follows the announcement last week In a press release last week, Bruun said Key Democrats said last
does this decision remove barriers or rein by Priority Oregon, a group funded by busi the state Is already "doing its part as an envi
force them?" she said. ness Interests, that It's spending at least ronmental leader" and a cap and trade sys week there would not be
Under Stamm. Meyer Memorial Trust $100,000 on a campaign urging Oregonians to tem "would have no impact on global green·
set a goal of diverslfylng its staff and board. tell lawmakers and Gov.K ate Brown to oppose house gas emissions or cllmate change.• He enough time to pass it
More than half its employees are now peo the plan. The group did not disclose a specific predicted the plan would, however, raise
ple of color, and two-thirds are women. budget, saying only that it planned to spend costsf or gas, food and energy. this year.
At the New School, DePass is dean of the six figures on television, radio and digital ads. Renew Oregon responded with a press
Milano School of International Affairs, Man Spokesman Scott Bruun said Thursday that release Thursday, in which executive direc
agement and Urban Policy. She was assistant he had no more information to share. tor Tera Hurst went after the businessg roup
administrator for international and tribal The two groups are dumping money into for running "tired attack ads.•
affairsi n the EnvironmentaPl rotection the campaigns even as it's unclear whether ''Every state and province in North Amer·
Agency during the Obama administration. Senate Democrats have enough votes to pass ica with a system in place like the Clean
Originally from New York, DePass pre the carbon proposal during the short 35-day Energy Jobs bill has a growing economy,
viously had been a program manager at session. Key Democrats said last week there stable energy prices, falllng pollution levels
the Ford Foundation. She graduated from would not be enough time to pass it this year. and thousands or new Jobs." Hurst said. "We
Tufts University, Fordham Law School and Under the proposal, companies that pro know the modern, clean economy is creat·
Baruch College, where she earned a mas duce more than 25,000 metric tons of carbon Ing good jobs and protecting our health."
ter's degree in public administration. dioxide a year would be required to purchase
Mike Rogoway "allowances·'f rom a carbon markett o cover hborrud@orego11ia11.co111
!
;:
;:
;:
The prettiest
i.l
Hawaiian
;:
heart.
.;.: ; :
,11:
Maile Heare Pendant
with Pink Mocher-of-Pearl Inlay in 14K Rose Gold
$399
Chain included
NAHOKU
fo,wa,ii 's Fine.st Jewders .Sinu 1SU
Washingron Square
By Porrland Seafood Company,5 03-684-6200
NaHoku.com
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.