Emergency pods 'useful tool' for rough
sleeping, says charity
19 December 2018
Share Save
Paul Heaney
BBC News
Pods can build trust with rough sleepers, the man who came up with the concept says
Emergency pods could be a useful tool to help people sleeping rough, a homeless
charity has said.
Watch Live
The pods in Newport provide individual, portable, insulated shelter with a key coded
door.
HCohmaerityN eTwhse WSpaorltlichBu ssainieds sit wInonuovladt iwonelcHoemalteh mCourletu lrieke AthrtesmT, rbauvetl thEea rptrhojeAcutd ihoasV bideeeon Live
turned down for a Welsh Government grant.
The government said it was investing more than £30m in tackling homelessness over
two years.
Wayne Evelyn, 39, became homeless 10 years ago when his relationship broke down.
Hotel steps in to give rooms to homeless over Christmas
Harry Redknapp will give jam roly polys to homeless
Being pregnant while homeless changed my life
"There's no end to the places I've slept," he said.
'Scared'
"I was staying awake walking the streets, I was scared to go into hostels sometimes
because things get stolen, and what little you have got you don't want to lose - when
you're homeless what little you have got, means double to you."
Mr Evelyn said he still managed to make it to his shifts at a bakery, but the stress of
not having a home led to a confrontation with someone he was staying with and he
was jailed after admitting grievous bodily harm.
"I'm very sorry for what happened," he said.
"I wish I could apologise for what I've done every day. I'm glad that I've done all these
[anger management] courses and I've learned how to be a part of society now.
Wayne Evelyn
Wayne Evelyn struggled to manage some living situations due to anxiety
"The only reason it happened is because I was homeless - if I wasn't homeless I'd never
have ended up in jail."
Mr Evelyn also found it difficult to manage some living situations due to anxiety,
which he now has medication for.
"The majority of the time if they offer you a place, you must accept it," he said.
"But sometimes you see things that happen, you get scared and you don't trust anyone.
When you suffer with anxiety it's difficult to be around people you don't know."
But Mr Evelyn added if the pods had existed, he would have used them.
"If you're in a place where you can open the door and you can shut the door, you feel
safe," he said.
The Amazing Grace Spaces project is seeking alternative funding, and Stuart Johnson
said the idea came after years of working in night shelters and asking those sleeping
rough what they wanted.
"Our vision is for people to stay overnight - to reach people who find it hard to engage
because they've been on the streets so long," he said.
The pods are made from timber and fibreglass, with a chemical toilet, a bed and a phone charger powered by a solar panel
"With this, because they need a code to access it, they come back to you - you build up
a trust, they can trust you, you can trust them and then help them and see how they
want to move forward."
Misconceptions
Lindsay Cordery-Bruce, chief executive of The Wallich, said: "They're definitely a
useful tool, we'd welcome more of them - but the support has to be in place so that it
doesn't just become somewhere else where somebody feels excluded.
"I think there's a misconception about homelessness out there we're talking about
buildings, when we're actually talking about exclusion.
"The evidence and the science on this is really clear, it's about how we engage the
person, rather than what sort of pod space or bed space we offer them.
"How we meet people in their own environment where they're comfortable, how we
take services to them is the key to solving homelessness, rather than expecting people
to navigate complex systems."
The Welsh Government said: "We will continue to work with Newport City Council
and other partners to prioritise the most effective appropriate projects to support
people to move off the street and into longer term housing solutions."
It was announced on Wednesday that an extra £1.34m over winter - including £25,000
for every local authority and specific funding for Cardiff, Swansea, Newport and
Wrexham as they are the four areas with the most complex rough sleeping issues.
'Befriend homeless' to help tackle drug use
Rough sleeper numbers rise in Wales
Call for councils to give homeless jobs
Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live
Documentaries Weather BBC Shop BritBox
BBC in other languages
Follow BBC on:
Terms of Use Subscription Terms About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC
Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index
Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach
to external linking.