Newspapers·
The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon) · Sun, Dec 16, 2018 · Page A14
by <f;1a ncestry· Downloaded on Dec 29, 2025
https://oregonlive.newspapers.com/image/1158998078/
A14 SUNDAY, DECEMBER 16, 2018 THE OREGONIAN
Climate
FROMAl
Meanwhile the traditional business lobby,
which has opposed past versions ort he
legislation, is in disarray and going into
the 2019s ession flat-Footed.
> Lawmakers have signaled their willing
ness to meet one of Portland General Elec
tric and PacifiCorp's key demands on rhe
bill, a move designed to win their support
for the legislation and remove a powerful
barrier.
> Successive reports are painting an
increasingly dire picture of the effects
and pace of climate change, backing the
case for immediate action. The most
recent came in this week's biennial report
to the Legislature by the state Global
Warming Commission. It suggests that
Oregon's emissions are on the rise again
and that the state is unlikely to meet its
emission-reduction goals. Meanwhile,
the effects of climate change are already
being felt regionally and will intensify.
None of this is to say that passage of the
Clean Energy Jobs bill is a lock. It is still a
highly complex piece of leglslallon, one that
is effectively a new tax on businesses and
consumers that could easily get entangled
in the end-of-session logjam with other rev
enue measures.
While backers claim their polling shows
strong support for climate legislation, voters
in Washington have twice rejected a carbon
tax, most recently last month. Though the
policy differs from the cap-and-trade system
Oregon is considering, the outcome reflects
deep-seated opposition in some corners of the
business community and the voting public.
For Brown, the climate change legislation
could define both her legacy and her future.
She admits as much: '"This is absolutely a
legacy Issue," she said. "Future generations
will judge us not on the fact of global climate
change, but what we've done to tackle it."
For a governor who is staunchly pro-en
vironment but regularly criticized for her
failure to lead on big issues, enacting the
nation's second economy-wide cap on green
house gas emissions would be signature leg·
lslatlon - no matter what happens on the
perennial question of taxes and education
funding.
"People have been waiting for her to use
her political capital to publicly lead the
charge on a big issue, not Just negotiate
behind the scenes," said Jim Moore, a polit
ical scientist at Pacific University. "This is
something you can nail to the wall and say, Concessions are being made to try to get power companies to support the Clean Energy Jobs bill. Faith Cathccm.file
'I did this. and the world is a better place for
it."'
Dave Robertson, PGE's vice president of potential brawl over new taxes. After this Oregon to slash greenhouse gas emissions good start. Now we need to get into the work
public policy, says it's hard to overstate the year's short legislative session ended, he told 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. But groups:·
importance of the governor's role. Her cham fellow lawmakers chat if they weren't willing there is debate about how quickly the emis Environmental advocates say much of the
pioning the work of the Carbon Policy Office, to pass a carbon cap, they shouldn't bother sions cap should decline between now and utilities' emissions reductions are more than
and coordinating with lawmakers to head off showing up in 2019. And he says he doesn't 2035, as the scientilicconsensus is that early a decade away as they accelerate the closure
any problems is a prime example. he said. Intend to shelve the bill if it doesn't find any actions are becoming more crucial. of coal plants after 2030. They don't oppose
"This is such a complicated and time-In Republican support. The governor and other sponsors are some level of free allowances for utilities
tensive legislative lift," he said. "If you don't "This is an incredibly important piece of ready to make at least one big concession but don't want to see the state let the sector
have someone like the governor making it a legislation,Nh e said ... , don't want todo it just to win over the electric utilities. The pre entirely off the hook between now and 2030.
priority, without that bully pulpit push, it's with D votes. but lfwe have to do It, we will vious version of the legislation would have The utilities may get much of what they
easy to say, 'That's too complicated. Let's do go that way." required the companies to buy allowances want. Big timber and agriculture also have
it later."' Sen. Cliff Bentz, R·Ontario, the co-vice and offsets to cover their emissions, just been exempted from regulation. That leaves
For her part, Brown says her role "is to chair of the Joint Interim Committee on Car like industrial companies and fuels pro mam.1facturing and industrial companies,
set the broader principles and. behind the bon Reduction, says he won't be that biparti viders. The utilities have argued, however. particularly those that are "emissions-In
scenes, to do the arm-twisting, the carrot, san vote, even if the Legislature is willing to that they already are subject to mandates tensive-trade-exposed" - companies that
and the kick in the rear to get this done." do away with the Clean Fuels Program, long forcing them to stop using coal-fired power have high emissions per unit of production.
The legacy question may be an important a target of his ire. Bentz says it's a waste of and meet half their customer demand with limited opportunities for emissions reduc
one for Courtney as well. The often-caman· time to argue about the existence of climate renewable energy by 2040 - laws that will tions, and an Inability to pass a carbon cost
kerous 75-year-old, who has been the upper change. The planet Is warming, he said, and push them into compliance with the green through to customers without losing market
chamber's presiding officer for the last 15 we need to adapt. His worry is that a cap house gas targets. share.
years. openly mulled retirement after the and-trade system won't work. Rather than asking ratepayers to pay From a policy standpoint. the concern
2017 Legislative session. In 34 years in the "There is going to be a cap-and-trade bill." twice for the same emissions reductions. here is "leakage" - that Oregon's carbon
Legislature, he has shepherded countless he said. "I can't stop lt.1·m at the table lrying they maintain, the state should provide the pricing will push companies to shift produc
pieces of legislation to passage. But more to make the package less damaging to Ore utilities with free allowances and let them go tion and employment elsewhere, harming
recently. he has been criticized from within gon." about their business. The governor's climate the economy without generating any climate
his own party for failing to move bills that Though the Clean Energy Jobs bill has agenda proposes to do exactly that. benefit. Bentz points to Ore-Ida Foods in
don't have at least some bipartisan support. already been through three sessions, the "We're cautiously optimistic," Robertson Ontario. "'I do not want to drive It 150 yards
Courtney says that criticism stings. And highly complicated policy has lots of poten said. "As far as the principles we've been away into Idaho," he said. "'It will be devas
while he claims not to believe in legacies, tial sticking points. Even the fundamentals working on - customers not paying twice, tating."
success on the climate bill would give him - what the state's carbon caps will be - are maintaining affordability - she's hitting on Crafting a policy that prevents leakage
another significant victory, even amid a subject to debate. The eventual goal Is for those notes so we were fairly pleased. It's a while preserving the integrity of the carbon
Copyright © 2025 Newspapers.com. All Rights Reserved.