Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Nov 1, 2018 at 4:56 pm
The Portland Business Alliance Kicked
Out Faith Leaders Wanting to Talk to
Them About the Clean Energy Initiative
BLAIR STENVICK
PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY INITIATIVE
PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY INITIATIVE REV. DR. JANET PARKER, REV. SOLVEIG NILSEN-GOODIN, AND REV. E.D.
MONDAINÉ OUTSIDE PORTLAND BUSINESS ALLIANCE OFFICES THURSDAY MORNING.
On Thursday morning, three Portland faith leaders paid a visit to the
Portland Business Alliance (PBA) to deliver a letter signed by 25 of their
colleagues, urging the alliance to stop opposing the Portland Clean Energy
Initiative on moral grounds. But they didn’t get very far.
The Portland Clean Energy Initiative, formally known as Measure 26-201, is
a ballot measure that would collect a one percent business license
surcharge from businesses that make at least $1 billion annually, and use it
to fund environmentally friendly projects like weatherizing homes, training
people for green jobs, and upping the city’s use of clean energy. The PBA is
one of the leading opposition groups to the measure.
Portland faith leaders hoped to persuade the alliance to stop opposing the
measure. But the PBA refused to meet with Rev. Dr. Janet Parker, Rev.
Solveig Nilsen-Goodin, and Rev. E.D. Mondainé.
“When I arrived earlier in the morning, the Portland Business Alliance
office was unlocked and the receptionist spoke with me,” said Mondainé, a
pastor with the Celebration Tabernacle Church and President of the
NAACP Portland Branch, according to a press release from the Oregon
Physicians for Social Responsibility. “When I returned at 9:30 am with my
colleagues to deliver our moral call, the office was locked and staff were
hiding from sight.”
Security officers asked the faith leaders to leave the building. The faith
leaders were joined by some members of the Portland Clean Energy
Initiative campaign, who caught the interaction on camera:
The PBA is housed at the 200 Market building, which includes retail and
restaurant spaces. The faith leaders moved on from the PBA office to a cafe
in the same building—only to have security officers again ask them to leave
the building altogether. They refused to do so, as they were paying
customers.
The faith leaders never got a chance to deliver their letter, which lays out
their reasons for supporting Measure 26-201 as a moral imperative.
“We urge you to reflect deeply on why you are opposing this community-
generated solution that aims to address historic inequities, our city’s
growing wealth inequality and the crisis of climate change,” reads the letter.
“We, as faith leaders, stand with and stand for Portland’s frontline
communities—communities of color and low-income communities that
experience injustice and inequity first and worst.”
When reached for comment, the Portland Business Alliance provided the
Mercury with the following statement from PBA President and CEO
Andrew Hoan.
"No one should feel unsafe or threatened in their workplace. Once informed
that the Clean Energy Fund Campaign was planning a ‘meeting’ in our
offices without our knowledge, we took reasonable precautions for the
safety of our staff. I take the wellbeing of our employees as my first priority,
and reject any behavior that would potentially create an unsafe
environment for both the staff of the Alliance and those who enter our
office as welcomed guests.
I am personally open to meeting with any individuals and groups interested
in a prosperous future for all Portlanders. We must rise above our
differences on any single policy issue and find solutions that accomplish
that shared goal. It’s not whether you win or lose in an election, it’s how you
do it."
Damon Motz-Storey, a spokesperson for the Clean Energy Initiative
campaign, expressed incredulity about Hoan's statement.
"It's hard to believe that three members of the clergy wearing religious garb
should cause PBA any safety concerns," he said. "That sounds like a
convenient excuse to not engage in face-to-face conversation. ... These faith
leaders wanted to deliver their message and letter in person, not be passed
off to a phone line or email thread. It speaks volumes about how out-of-
touch the Portland Business Alliance is with the people of Portland that
they won't even permit three clergymen to step into their reception area."
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 9     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Blair Stenvick
Blair Stenvick is a former news reporter and culture writer for the Portland Mercury.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Portland City Attorney to US DOJ: “Please Do Not Fail America”
Portland City Council Votes to Adopt AI Rental Price-Fixing Software Ban
What to Expect After Trump Threatens to Send Additional Troops to “War Ravaged”
Portland
Federal Judge Rules Against Trump, Barring Him from Deploying National Guard to
Oregon
The 'Big Beautiful Bill' is Gutting Oregon’s SNAP Benefits
Portland Police Will Continue Patrols at ICE Protests, Despite Restrictions on Overtime
Spending
Editors' Picks
Ice Cream Wars, Holiday Wars, and My Future Celebrity Skincare Line
BlackOut: A Five-Year Retrospective on Portland’s Racial Justice Movement
THE TRASH REPORT: Fascists are Babies, Celebrities are Silly, Rich People are Horrible
THE TRASH REPORT: Hollywood DC's Biggest Night, It's the State of the Academy
Awards!
Republican't Congress, John Lennon Was a Narc, Girl Chips, and Poor Cats
You Don’t Have to Be Drunk to Love Drunk Herstory
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286