SUPPORT
WW’s November 2018 Endorsements for Oregon Ballot Measures
Portland needs housing. Vote for that. Other ideas are far messier.
ByWW Staff | Published on October 17, 2018 5:32AM PDT
Read More
Stream a podcast of our endorsement, with highlights of some of the more spirited moments of
the candidates' interview, here.
Get Portland’s top stories delivered, every morning.
Subscribe to our Daily Primer. Oops, we couldn’t find that track.
Email Address *
Privacy policy
Subscribe
Measure 102
Combines public and private housing dollars
Yes
Oregon faces a housing crisis, not just in Portland but across the state. This measure would
amend the Oregon Constitution to allow more efficient financing of affordable housing
projects.
When the city of Portland persuaded voters to approve $258 million for affordable housing
in 2016, the plan contained one major flaw: Because of the state constitution, the city could
not leverage that money to build more units. It could not use the money to partner with
private developers or nonprofits, or borrow against the bonds, thus raising more money to
build housing.
FEATURED POST
Enjoy a “Winter Chill-Out” in Rockaway Beach
Sponsored Content
Read More
ADVERTISING
THE LATEST
DRINK
Deadstock Coffee Is Alive in Old Town
Who ShoFuOlOdD Use a Family Trust?
What We’re Cooking This Week: Radicchio Fried RiceL eWairthn HMoot rHeoney
SmartAsset-Sponsored
CITY
Gateway Is Where Good Intentions Stumbled
That meant only the city could own affordable housing properties that the bond proceeds
built or acquired.
Measure 102 would clear away that hurdle. Local governments would still have to make their
COURTS
Mother Forced to Dig Up Son’s Burial Vault
case to taxpayers any time they want to borrow money to pay for affordable housing. (Metro
is asking for $653 million on this ballot for that purpose—Measure 102 would make that
money stretch much further.)
GIVE!GUIDE
Just about everybody bGeivleie!Gveusid iet 'Rs aais geos o$d9. 2id Meiall: iLona wfomr Paokretrlasn idn- bAoretah N poanrptireosfi tvsoted unanimously
to refer the matter to voters, and there's no organized opposition to the measure. We are
typically wary of amending the constitution, but in this instance, it's warranted.
Measure 103 NEWS
WW’s Most-Read Stories of 2025
Bans grocery taxes
No
NEWS
Multnomah County to Shut Sunstone Way’s Market Street Shelter
Read More
This measure is the proverbial solution in search of a problem.
NEWS
Trump Indicates He Will Send Oregon National Guard Members Home
It would enshrine in the state constitution a prohibition on taxing groceries.
But nobody's seeking a statewide tax today on milk or beef or apples or any other foods.
InsteReaadd, tMhorise measure is a pre-emptive strike against the state adopting a sales tax, even
though in the vast majority of states that have sales taxes, groceries are exempt.
Our concern with Measure 103 is that it goes a lot further than just protecting what people
put in their shopping carts and on their dinner tables. By broadly defining "groceries" as
anything "from farm to fork," Measure 103 casts a wide net and would complicate Oregon's
already byzantine, broken tax structure.
It would prohibit, for example, taxes on at least some restaurant meals. Opponents say it
could also prohibit future changes to the gas tax and result in a host of other unintended
consequences.
In 2016, WW said no to Measure 97, a proposed $3 billion gross receipts tax. Our logic was
simple: Tax policy made at the ballot box is sloppy. That measure, backed by labor unions,
failed in part because voters feared companies that paid the tax—including grocers—would
pass the cost along to consumers.
And so grocers are back, using scare tactics to make tax policy at the ballot box—and lock it
into the constitution.
Voters elect lawmakers to work out complicated policy and figure out how to pay for it.
Direct democracy through the initiative process can be a powerful counterweight to
incompetence or the sway of special interests in Salem.
But this measure serves those special interests as surely as anything that comes out of the
Capitol. Grocery store chains spent big to get this on the ballot. (Kroger and Albertsons-
Safeway as well as the soda companies' industry group, the American Beverage Association,
have given more than $1.5 million in cash each during petitioning and the campaignR.e)ad More
And on a more practical level, Measure 103 ties policymakers' hands at the state and local
levels in ways even more harmful.
ADVERTISING
How Often Should You Take RMDs?
Learn More
smartasset.com-Sponsored
The measure would prohibit the future imposition of taxes on sodas and other sugary drinks
that cities such as Seattle and San Francisco have passed. And it would also probably protect
the tax-free status of e-cigarettes and vaping supplies.
In short, this measure is as messy as Hamburger Helper. And there's no way for lawmakers
to clean up the slop: The measure would be inscribed in the constitution. Just say no.
Read More
MMeeaassuurree 110033 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
Measure 104
Requires a three-fifths vote to raise fees or eliminate tax breaks
No
This constitutional amendment was placed on the ballot by the Oregon Association of
Realtors, who fear Democrats will try to pass laws reducing or eliminating the tax deduction
for interest paid on home mortgages. The Realtors have a legitimate concern: In 2017, there
was an unsuccessful attempt to do just that, and some lawmakers have vowed to keep
trying.
But 104 is more problematic than it seems—because it goes far beyond the question of home
mortgages. It would require a three-fifths majority vote of both legislative chambers to
increase any legislatively set fee (there are 2,400 of them) or to reduce any existing tax break
(there are 367 of those). Right now, lawmakers can eliminate a tax break—such as the
Business Energy Tax Credit, which squandered $1 billion in revenue—or raise a fee, such as
the cost of a fishing license, with a simple majority vote. To approve a new tax or increase an
existing tax, such as the income tax or gas tax, requires a three-fifths majority of boRtehad More
chambers.
Debating whether mortgage interest should be deductible is exactly the kind of drab but
important work lawmakers are supposed to do. Instead, voters are being asked to make
complex tax policy with one sweeping measure. That's almost always a bad idea. So is the
idea of amending the Oregon Constitution.
Right now, lawmakers can create new tax breaks with a simple majority vote. Tax breaks
cost the state and local governments $12 billion a year in forgone revenues. This measure
would make it much harder to claw back what the government gives away.
If Measure 104 passes, it would create a "roach motel" effect: Lawmakers can easily put
subsidies and tax breaks for corporations and wealthy individuals into law, but they can't get
them back out. Thumbs down.
MMeeaassuurree 110044 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
Measure 105
Repeals Oregon's sanctuary law Read More
No
In 1987, Oregon lawmakers overwhelmingly passed a "sanctuary law" that restricts state and
local law enforcement agencies from using their resources to enforce federal immigration
policies. The law prevents local officers from detaining people whose only offense is living in
the U.S. illegally, and from assisting the feds in investigating whether someone is living here
illegally.
They wanted to restrict the racial profiling of their Latino neighbors—some of whom, even
U.S. citizens, were being pulled over by police on the thin pretext of checking their
citizenship.
No honest observer would say the political climate around immigration has improved.
Immigration agents tear families and towns apart—even without the help of local police. But
the backers of Measure 105, Oregonians for Immigration Reform, want to repeal the
sanctuary law. They didn't bother showing up at an endorsement interview to defend the
specious, race-baiting arguments they used to put the measure on the ballot.
Indeed, there are moral, financial and public safety arguments against repealing the law.
Yes, people living in Oregon without legal authorization have broken a law. But it is a federal
law, and there is an entire federal agency dedicated to enforcing it: U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement. Oregon police shouldn't be enlisted to do ICE agents' jobs.
Proponents' fear-mongering claims about criminal immigrants are so overblown they're
essentially fiction. Data shows immigrants are far less likely to commit crimes than U.S.
citizens.
Perhaps most convincingly, the opposition argues that repealing the law would silence crime
Read More
victims and witnesses afraid of risking deportation for coming forward. That could leave
citizens and immigrants alike in danger.
The claim is well-founded. Law enforcement agencies in Texas reported a sharp drop in the
number of domestic violence calls in immigrant communities after the state passed a law
requiring local cops to aid the feds. We don't want to see that happen here.
Reject this bad idea.
MMeeaassuurree 110055 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
Measure 106
Bans state funding for abortions
No
For the nearly five decades since Roe v. Wade, Oregon has stood as the only state in the
nation not to chip away at abortion rights.
But here's Measure 106, which would bar state funding for elective abortions for women
below a certain income level. It would also require that the state no longer carry health
Read More
insurance for employees that covers the procedure.
We have long supported the right to choose and see no reason to change our position now.
Proponents of this measure claim it would not restrict any woman's right to choose an
abortion. That claim is false. Not providing public dollars would disproportionately affect
low-income women who depend on the Oregon Health Plan to pay for the procedure. It
would also unfairly limit health care coverage for public employees in a state where private
providers are required by law to cover abortions.
Proponents argue taxpayers shouldn't have to fund something they fundamentally disagree
with. But taxpayers have to do that all the time. Don't like wars? Bummer! You still pay for
them. Hate logging? Your taxes still fund state forestry. You get the point: The same
principle applies to women's health.
The state only spends about $2 million each fiscal year on abortions paid for through the
Oregon Health Plan. That's 0.005 percent of the state's budget. That small amount provides
an essential public health service to women who would otherwise struggle to access
abortion.
Abortion is already safe, legal and rare in Oregon. It's also accessible to women of all income
levels and circumstances. We should keep it that way.
MMeeaassuurree 110066 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
Read More
Measure 26-199
SHOP NOW
Metro housing bond
Yes
There's no question the Portland area needs more affordable housing.
More than 6,000 people currently sit on waitlists for housing vouchers, and none of the
three counties in the Portland area is accepting new applications. The official estimate is
that the region is short 48,000 units for the region's lowest-income residents.
That's why Metro, the regional planning agency, is asking voters for a $653 million bond
could help build 3,900 homes in Multnomah, Washington and Clackamas counties. That
means the owner of a house with an assessed value of $250,000 would pay an extra $60 a
year.
That won't solve homelessness. But it's a start toward addressing the rising cost of housing
in the region that continues to push low-income Portlanders out of the region.
Two years ago, Portland proposed a similar housing bond. We recommended a "no" vote.
(Voters ignored us—and approved a $258 million bond.) Part of our concern was that the city
wasn't building the most possible units at the least cost to taxpayers.
But this time, a constitutional amendment—Measure 102—is also on the ballot that would
allow more units to be built with each dollar. (See our endorsement on page 24 for how that
would work.) Without that rule change, the new bond remains inefficient. With it, the bond
dollars could go further. We urge you to vote for these measures as a joint ticket—and
ensure the biggest bang for your buck.
Our endorsement comes with reservations, however.
Read More
We remain frustrated that cities across the region aren't doing more to foster market rate
development. Portland still holds up the permitting and design review process. City Hall has
been glacially slow on a proposal to add more apartments to neighborhoods that still look
like suburbs. The Portland Housing Bureau still hasn't made the most of its scarce dollars.
But those complaints aren't a good reason to reject more public investment in housing for
our poorest neighbors.
Metro, by being a three-county agency, has the scope to make the entire region address a
regional issue. Spreading the cost across three counties also keeps the tax burden low. Five
bucks a month is a bag of Halloween candy. Homeowners can swallow it.
This measure doesn't do enough—but it does something. Vote yes.
MMeeaassuurree 2266 119999 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
City of Portland Measure 26-200
Limits campaign contributions in city races
Yes
Read More
Oregon's campaign finance system is broken.
The candidate with the most money wins Oregon legislative races 92 percent of the time,
one study showed. And only a tiny fraction of Oregonians ever contribute to political races.
That means a handful of people—plus labor unions and corporations—with a whole lot of
money effectively decide who will represent you in government.
Oregon is one of just a half-dozen states that have no caps on campaign contributions.
This measure won't tame that Wild West. Instead, think of it as a sheriff in one frontier town.
It will cap donations in Portland city races. (Supporters of this measure plan to go to the
ballot in 2020 for statewide spending caps.)
Measure 26-200 would cap individual contributions in city races at $500 and forbid
corporate donations while allowing PACs that are funded by a group of small donors. A
candidate's own contribution to the campaign would be capped at $5,000.
We agree with all of these ideas. We're not sure they'll stand up in court. A similar measure
passed overwhelmingly in 2016 by voters in Multnomah County was ruled unconstitutional
by a circuit judge. The backers have appealed.
We don't know how that case will turn out. But as we argued in 2016, the idea is a good one
and worth pressing the courts to reconsider.
Read More
MMeeaassuurree 2266 220000 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
City of Portland Measure 26-201
Business tax for clean energy projects
No
This takes the prize for the measure with the best intentions but the worst execution among
any we've seen this year.
We understand the powerful appeal of Portland's Clean Energy Initiative. Backers say it
would help low-income Portlanders and communities of color save money on their utility
bills by making their homes more energy efficient. As an added bonus, a chunk of the money
raised would go to job training for the same historically underserved communities.
The rationale undergirding this idea: Utility costs and the impacts of climate change both
disproportionately affect low-income and minority Portlanders.
The source of the proposed funding will also appeal to many voters. The initiative would slap
a new tax on big corporations such as WalMart, Comcast and Wells Fargo. Such national
Read More
giants are easy targets. They make lots of money, pay low rates of state income tax and just
got a windfall from President Donald Trump's tax plan.
Half to three-quarters of the money raised would be spent on energy efficiency and projects
that reduce carbon emissions. The rest would go toward job training for low-income and
minority workers. Proponents, who include more than 150 nonprofits representing a wide
range of environmental, community and labor groups, paint a picture of low-income
Portlanders installing solar panels, new insulation and better windows on their homes,
creating jobs and helping to meet the city's ambitious carbon reduction targets.
Sounds good, right? Well, there are a few problems both in who'd actually pay the tax and
how the money would be spent.
First, although proponents deny it, the tax would fall hardest on the very people it's
supposed to help: the poor. The initiative imposes a tax on gross receipts—that means sales.
In an analysis of the measure last year, the city's Revenue Division asserted "some
businesses will partially or wholly pass the [tax] on to consumers in the form of a price
increase."
Second, the measure does not require that investment of the tax dollars in energy efficiency
actually go to the homes of low-income Portlanders. Measure guidelines say that "at least
half of the grants in this category should specifically benefit low-income people and people
of color." Why not all of it? Why allow half to go to people who are neither low-income or
people of color? And in legal terms, the word "should" is not the same as "must." In fact, it's
such a weak guideline that all the money could be spent entirely for the benefit of middle-
class whites.
Nobody agrees on how much money the tax might raise. Estimates range from $35 million to
$79 million a year. That's a big variance. And unlike many special-purpose taxes approved by
voters—such as the Portland Children's Levy or funding for the Oregon Historical Society,
both of which must be reapproved regularly by voters—there is no sunset clause for the
Clean Energy Fund. Even the Multnomah County Library employed temporary funding for
36 years before becoming a permanent taxing district in 2012.
Read More
So we have a tax that would come out of the pockets of people it claims to help, with no
guarantees the money would go to them, or any way to shut the spigot off if the experiment
fails.
And, as the left-leaning group Tax Fairness Oregon points out, Portland is already far ahead
of most cities in terms of weatherization, which, in any case, is not the most pressing
challenge Portlanders face. "This measure appears to put the climate far above the
education of our children, where we rank bottom in the country, housing our citizens, or
preparation for a seismic event," the group said in a Voters' Pamphlet statement. "Let's put
our limited resources towards our biggest problems." Vote no.
MMeeaassuurree 2266 220011 FFaallll 22001188 EElleeccttiioonn
Endorsements: Governor
Endorsements: Congress
Endorsements: Legislative
Endorsements: Local
Read More
Endorsements: Measures
Explore 2018 endorsements, ballot measures, Measure 102, Measure 103, measure 104, Measure
more 105, Measure 106, Measure 26-199, Measure 26-200, Measure 26-201, november election,
on: Oregon measures, WW endorsements
WW Staff | newstips@wweek.com
Teamwork.
Willamette Week’s reporting has concrete impacts that change laws, force action from
civic leaders, and drive compromised politicians from public office.Support WW
SUPPORT
Around The Web
CVS Hides This $1 Generic Knee Experts Stunned: New North Carolina Legalizes
Viagra - Here’s The Aisle It's Device is Changing Lives Online Cannabis Purchases
Really in Fast
Mood
Friday Plans RejuvaKnee
Vet Warns Americans: "If Cardiologist Warns: "Avoid Seniors Born 1939-1969
Read More
Your Dog Licks Its Paws, Bottled Water at All Costs" Receive 11 Benefits This
Watch This Immediately" Month If They Ask
Well Being For All
ExpertsInPetHealth Super Saving Online
Cardiologist: This is The #1 Top Cardiologist Begs: Quit Quickly Trim Thick &
Olive Oil You Should Be Eating Blueberries Before Ingrown Nails With This
Drinking This Happens Clipper
Well Being For All GundryMD peoasis
Read More
ALSO ON WILLAMETTE WEEK
6 days ago •11 comments 4 days ago •12 comments
RReeaaddeerrss WWaarrnneerr PPaacciiff
RReessppoonndd ttoo RReecceeiivveess SSoomm
RReeaall--EEssttaattee …… FFuunnddiinngg ttoo ……
Read More
Read More
Willamette Week Comment Policy
Comments that are irrelevant or incendiary will be deleted. Got it
Disruptive users will be banned at WW's discretion.
What do you think?
5 Responses
Upvote Funny Love Surprised Angry Sad
31 Comments  1 Login
G
Join the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS ?
Name
Want more?
Subscribe to Willamette Week's newsletter to get the best of each issue delivered straight to your inbox.
✉ Enter email address Subscribe
Hide this message
 Share Best Newest Oldest
L LH − ⚑
7 years ago
I am so disappointed to see that your recommendation about the Portland Clean Energy
Initiative relies on the same tired (and debunked) arguments climate policy opponents have
made since climate policy was invented. I expected better from you, WWeek!
And for others: Please join me in voting Yes on this initiative. It is communities-of-color led,
Read More
well-written, has tons of grassroots support, and will help position Portland as a leader in both
clean economic development and equity!
9 0 Reply ⥅
9 0 Reply ⥅
Bryan > LH − ⚑
7 years ago edited
I have to say the rebuttals to WWeek's position on 26-201 sound quite naive!
The companies affected by this tax care greatly about their margins; of course this tax
will be passed on to consumers. Do they NEED to pass it on to consumers? No, but
they will, if for no other reason than to turn this into a cautionary tale.
26-201 is a regressive tax. Make no mistake about it.
I might have supported it anyways if the money was going to a specific purpose.
However, the measure is far too vague.
I support government aggressively attacking climate change problems. Show me a
more concrete proposal, and I will vote for the tax to fund it.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Nathan > LH − ⚑
7 years ago
I'm voting No, as the WW pointed out, we are already on the leading edge of
American cities on our work for climate change, and currently we have more pressing
issues that also need focusing. For example homelessness, affordable housing,
seismic upgrades, etc
This is neglecting how the threshold for the tax is an arbitrary figure with an
assessment not based actual profits but on gross sales.
0 1 Reply ⥅
A Ali Berman − ⚑
7 years ago
I'm very disappointed that Willamette Week took a no stance on 26-201, the Portland Clean
Energy Initiative. This measure simultaneously fights climate change and promotes social
justice, two things this city desperately need to go into the future. If the Willamette Week truly
valued the environment and equity, they would have endorse this measure as so many others
have done. Organizations representing communities of color like APANO, Verde, NAACP
Portland Branch, and NAYA have been on the front lines of this initiative. The fear that it
won't actually serve communities of color and instead will cater to middle class white folks
isn't just wrong; it totally goes against the point of this measure. I'm disappointed in your
decision. It reeks of the positions of the billion dollar companies that don't want to spare a
small amount of money to invest in the communities where they make their money.
7 0 Reply ⥅
Laura Nash − ⚑
Read More
7 years ago
So basically you all are insulting the intelligent, informed and experienced people of color who
i d db ll 6 d l di h l dCl i i i
introduced ballot measure 26-201 and are leading the Portland Clean Energy Initiative
campaign by saying that they don't understand the process they're working within and are
harming themselves, their families, and their communities by supporting Measure 26-201. I
would argue that they understand the process and what harms or helps their communities
better than anyone. I'm going to follow their lead on this one, and I encourage others to do the
same. Vote YES on 26-201!
7 0 Reply ⥅
D Dude − ⚑
7 years ago
Willamette Week is so progressive, when it's safe. It's easy and popular to resist Trump in
Portland. The cover graphic is impressive, but your editorial board doesn't need the masks; it's
composed mostly of white men. Rather than tell low-income Portlanders and communities of
color what is good for them, you could try listening to people who would benefit most from the
Portland Clean Energy Initiative rather than the mammoth companies that would pay for
game-changing local action on climate change. Echoing the talking points bought and paid for
by corporations casts further doubt on your judgment and, sadly, your values. Willamette
Week can do better. Portland deserves better. Vote YES on Measure 26-201!
7 0 Reply ⥅
lowe76 − ⚑
7 years ago edited
Your claims about Portland Clean Energy Initiative are false. Three out of many are: 1) You say
that all of the 1% surcharge on in-city revenues of large national retailers (affects ca. 120
businesses out of over 5000) will be passed on to consumers. The City Club of Portland
research report said "current research does not support the claim that a relatively small
corporate surcharge, such as 1% on large businesses, would negatively affect capital formation,
prices, or wages." Home Depot, Michael's, or Target uses the same prices in Portland today as
in jurisdictions where they pay much higher taxes. One percent of Portland revenue will be
.001% or less of national revenue for most or all of them.
2) Your snarky lie says supporters "paint a picture of low-income Portlanders installing solar
panels, new insulation and better windows on their homes." That's *your* picture. It reveals
how little you know or care about the lives of low income Portlanders. Picture this instead:
rental complexes where tenants can't make energy improvements to drafty, leaky, ill-health
causing apartments. Picture projects subsidizing such improvements by landlords. Picture
dramatically reduced heating bills that come on top of Portland's outlandish rents
3) Schools are not funded by the city. If you want to address school funding, maybe start by
restoring the cuts to corporate property tax rates sneaked into residential property tax
limitations in the 1990s? Defeating PCEI will not raise a cent for schools. This is an oily bait
and switch argument.
For other needs that Tax Fairness Oregon names, maybe work to end the many state on local
revenue raising? When I came to Portland in 1977 for college, corporate taxes were 18% of
Read More
state & local government revenues. Today they are under 7%. The big corporations are not
paying their fair share. So Portland faces cuts budgets in times of high employment, and
deepercutsbudgetsinhardertimes
deeper cuts budgets in harder times.
Both you and Tax Fairness Oregon are wrong in policy and wrong morally to pit the needs you
name against one another. You're wrong and deeply paternalistic to oppose new revenues for
high priority needs for low income communities and communities of color, identified by their
organizations. And just weird to exclude energy transition and the climate crisis from highest
needs. Building a better future has to mean energy transition for *everyone*, not just upper
middle class and wealthy home-owners, with participation in new energy economy jobs by
currently marginalized people. PCEI is a beginning of movement in that direction. Vote Yes on
26-201!
Chris Lowe, SE Portland
6 0 Reply ⥅
Damon Motz-Storey − ⚑
7 years ago edited
Willamette Week's endorsement of no on measure 26-201 is one-sided and embarrassing for
their all-white editorial board to ignore the leadership and innovation of Oregon's first-ever
environmental initiative led by people of color. Van Jones called this the most important ballot
measure in the United States and over 200 community organizations have endorsed. "Worst
execution"? Give me a break. Tell that to the City Club of Portland, Oregon Citizens Utility
Board, and 11 state lawmakers who have all endorsed 26-201, including House Speaker Tina
Kotek and Majority Leader Jennifer Williamson. Vote YES on 26-201, the Portland Clean
Energy Initiative.
9 1 Reply ⥅
AB > Damon Motz-Storey − ⚑
7 years ago
I agree, Embarrassing is definitely the right word for this abomination of an
assessment of Measure 26-201. Here's a headline for you, WW: "All-White editorial
board slams Groundbreaking Initiative led by Portland's Communities of Color."
These large companies that would be impacted by this measure have national pricing
strategies. This same tired argument that costs will be passed on to consumers just
doesn't hold water here. These companies will not be modifying their pricing
strategies in one city in one state just to recoup a 1% surcharge on local sales. Also,
these companies received a massive windfall from a 14% reduction in the corporate
tax rate last year. They need to pay their fair share.
And yet another tired talking point that WW puts forth: we shouldn't put money
towards this Clean Energy Initiative because there are other important problems to
work on in Portland. This argument is so pathetic. Why do we have to choose one or
the other? Just because some community groups got together to address climate
change in Portland means that the city itself or other community groups can't start to
work on tackling other problems in Portland? How does that logic work? This
initiative is groundbreaking and attempts to tackle some major problems iRne Paod rMtloarned,
but guess what, we've got a lot of other stuff to work on too. It's NOT an either/or
choice, that's just a false narrative from WW.
Don't listen to this extremely lazy and misinformed assessment by WW. Definitely
vote Yes on Measure 26-201, the Portland Clean Energy Initiative!
9 0 Reply ⥅
C Christa von Behren > Damon Motz-Storey − ⚑
7 years ago edited
Yes, how paternalistic of WW to suggest that they know what's better for oppressed
people than those people themselves do. YES on 26-201!
7 0 Reply ⥅
Nathan > Damon Motz-Storey − ⚑
7 years ago
So just because the initiative was started by minority, means that one can not
critically analyze the feasibility of the measure nor voice opposition without being
labelled racist regardless of the quality of said initiative. The WW clearly pointed out
that while already a leader on climate change, we have more pressing issues that
need $ and our attention.
0 1 Reply ⥅
B Blaine Palmer − ⚑
7 years ago
3. "There's no sunset clause, and the tax might raise more than anticipated. So we could be
paying for energy reduction measures even after global warming has been solved." Seriously?
5 0 Reply ⥅
Kimber Nelson − ⚑
7 years ago
Shamefully weak arguments against Measure 26-201! You close by citing opponents' argument
that we have more important problems, as if our community can only work on one problem??
First, the Portland Clean Energy Initiative creates NEW funds to address climate change, so it
is not taking away from current or future resources for other important issues. Second, the UN
just put out a report that humanity has a maximum of 12 years to take dramatic action before
"climate catastrophe" is inevitable, so we need to take every action we can right now - voting
YES on the Portland Clean Energy Initiative is one step.
I'd encourage Portland (and your all-white editorial board) to for once follow the leadership of
people of color and low income people. You can bet the community organizations that heavily
invested in creating and promoting this Initiative will be active watchdogs ensuring the
community board and mayor implementing the Fund get the money to its intended
destinations.
4 0 Reply ⥅
Read More
AB > Kimber Nelson − ⚑
7 years ago
Yes, that's the most absurd part of the whole argument: that a community can only
work on one problem at a time! How did a group of seemingly professional
journalists get together and decide that was a legitimate argument to make?
3 0 Reply ⥅
Guy Berliner − ⚑
7 years ago edited
Congrats to Wweek editors, you guys are surely the smartest in the room. You singlehandedly
outsmarted both Walmart AND a massive, painstakingly built, and unprecedented grassroots
coalition of environmental, low income, and minority advocacy groups (by your very own
account), by concluding that measure 26-201 will not do what either of those parties appear to
agree about: namely, keep more dollars that would otherwise flow into Walmart's coffers in
distant Bentonville, AR, in our local economy instead, where they can be put to better use.
Walmart, who spent millions to preempt Measure 26-201 (via state measure 103) combined
with its earlier, highpowered legal and lobbyist efforts to strangle it in its cradle (courtesy local
megacorporate PR flack Pat McCormick, cf: https://www.wweek.com/news/... ), apparently
wasted their money, according to you, since they can easily pass along "...some or all of their
increased costs" to consumers. (News flash: there's a big difference between "some" and "all",
and in that difference lies the millions of dollars that could flow into smaller local businesses,
who will suddenly find themselves much more competitive against Walmart, if it chooses to do
that. And those small, local businesses employ vastly more people per square foot of retail
space than Walmart does.)
The massive grassroots coalition I referred to apparently failed to avail themselves of your
brilliant policymaking skills, too, and have come up with a measure that will actually hurt the
very people (themselves!) whom they are trying to help. Hopefully, next time they will pay you
to consult for them (like Measure 103 backers have apparently munificently done, given that
the latter's ads for that Measure appear much more prominently on your website than your
Help us dig deeper.
Contribute to Local Journalism.
Donate
Find a Paper About WW
Sign up for our Newsletters Add Your Event To Our Calendar
Subscribe or Get a Back Issue Advertise
Become a Friend of Willamette Week Work With Us
Contribute or Intern
Read More
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Twitter Get Portland's top stories delivered straight to
YouTube your inbox, everyday.
Facebook
Instagram Email Address *
Bluesky
RSS Feeds
Subscribe
Read More