Trash-strewn Portland must become
cleanest city in America, mayor vows
• Published: Sep. 06, 2018, 2:54 p.m.
Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler, pictured with several city bureau directors and
managers during a press conference on Thursday, September 6, 2018 in Portland City
Hall. (Gordon R. Friedman/The Oregonian)
•
•
•
•
•
By
• Gordon R. Friedman | The Oregonian/OregonLive
Keep Watching
2
More Oregonians Can Now Register to Vote OnlineMore Oregonians Can Now Register to Vote Online
Read More
Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler announced Thursday his intention to create a
city program that would clean up trash and debris strewn throughout the city
center.
Though Wheeler's announcement was short on specifics, he made clear his
goal that Portland be "the cleanest and most livable city in the United States"
and said an element of the new program will be to install more trash cans in
the city core and establish regular pickups at the receptacles.
Complaints about trash on public streets, particularly in downtown and
surrounding areas, are the most common grievances residents voice to the
mayor, Wheeler said Thursday.
In fact, Wheeler said a resident approached him during his Thursday morning
treadmill workout to complain about trash left by homeless people in the
resident's neighborhood. Wheeler said that while he and his young daughter
were in the Northwest 23rd Avenue area Labor Day weekend, they noticed
the few trash bins available to the public were overflowing.
"We need to come together with a new and aggressive strategy around
keeping our community clean and keeping our community livable," Wheeler
said, adding "I've heard from everybody on this."
"I don't think it's rocket science," the mayor said.
Yet Wheeler hinted that cleaning up trash around the city is more
complicated than it may seem. He said initial research has shown some trash
bins are managed by a downtown trash collection district, while others are
run by transit authorities and still more are controlled by business districts.
Collecting litter near area freeways is the responsibility of the Oregon
Department of Transportation. And a "patchwork of commercial trash
haulers" all have a hand in the current system, Wheeler said.
The mayor vowed his administration will find a way to streamline the process
and pick up more trash.
Downtown Portland businesses already pay for the Clean & Safe District, a
213-block segment of downtown monitored by roaming cleaning crews and
security teams each day of the week. Crews removed 724 tons of garbage
and more than 27,000 needles from downtown last year, according to the
district's figures.
Recognizing the thin line between removing garbage from city streets and
throwing away the belongings of Portland's many homeless people, the
mayor said that whatever plan is developed "will not be about homeless
camp movement."
Sonia Schmanski, chief of staff for Commissioner Nick Fish, said Fish and
Commissioner Chloe Eudaly have had preliminary conversations with the
mayor's office about a renewed trash clean-up effort. As parks commissioner,
Fish has some control over trash collection policy within city parks. As
transportation commissioner, Eudaly oversees city rights of way.
Speaking at a press conference Thursday, Wheeler let his thoughts drift back
to his childhood in Portland and spoke of his pride in a clean city where "you
just didn't see litter." Portland can and should return to those halcyon days
when seeing trash on city streets was a rarity, he said.