Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Aug 9, 2018 at 1:36 pm
How Will E-Scooters Benefit Low-Income
Communities?
ALEX ZIELINSKI
IMG_8475.JPG
K MARIE
Portland Bureau of Transportation's (PBOT) permitting process for e-
scooters came with a equity-focused requirement: all companies must
place a certain number of scooters east of 82nd Ave, in Far NE Portland,
and in the Cully Neighborhood (called the "East Neighborhoods Pattern
Area").
The idea is to see if e-scooters will actually be of service to people living
outside of the wealthier and whiter bubble that envelops inner Portland
neighborhoods. PBOT will seriously consider this data when the city's 120-
day pilot draws to a close—and the city considers issuing long-term permits
to these companies. PBOT spokseperson Dylan Rivera is particularly
interested if e-scooters will make public transportation a little more
accessible to those who don't usually ride.
"Maybe it will make it easier to reach a light rail stop on I-205... who knows,"
Rivera says. "It's probably more profitable for companies to concentrate
their scooters downtown, but we want to see how it works across the city."
Another way to measure e-scooter equity is through the application
process. In the form companies must fill out to request a city e-scooter
permit, PBOT asks how a company will work to engage "low-income and
historically underserved communities." Here are the official questions:
The Mercury requested copies of the PBOT applications for all three e-
scooter companies—Skip, Bird, and Lime—to see what they may have in
store. Here's what we learned:
Skip
Skip pointed to two examples of how low-income people can benefit from
the company: Free scooter rides for people who charge the contraption at
their house (we have no idea how much that will impact an electric bill,
however) and rewarding houseless Portlanders who return scooters to
charging centers with money and/or a hot meal.
Skip also suggested a fee-reduction program for low-income people. " We
envision residents qualifying through... SNAP/“Oregon Trail Card”, Oregon
Health Plan, Oregon Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program and
Oregon LifeLine," the application reads.
According to its application, Skip staff have already met with East Portland
neighbors to talk about investing in better transportation infrastructure
(bike lanes, sidewalks, etc.) to make e-scooter riding more of a reality. Skip
has also placed their East Portland scooters in areas close to bus stops to
inspire multi-modal trips.
Lime
Lime's answers are a little more vague than Skip's. In its application, Lime
says that "in other cities" the company has hired veterans, formerly
incarcerated people, and "people from disadvantaged communities." They
plan to do the same in Portland. Lime says it has already been meeting with
people at Self Enhancement, Inc. (SEI) about job opportunities.
Lime does not offer discounted pricing for people with low incomes. But,
according to Lime, scooters are already affordable. "Our vehicles are
typically considerably cheaper than operating one’s own car or other
alternatives; we seek every opportunity to demonstrate this to all
communities - especially low income and historically underserved
communities."
Bird
Bird's application was sent to us with a lot of pages redacted. Either those
redacted items include its equity plan—or the company didn't suggest one.
We'll update this post as we get more information about the company.
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 2     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
"Secretary of War" Pete Hegseth Issues Order to Activate Oregon National Guard in
Portland
Trail Blazers' Head Coach Chauncey Billups Arrested in Connection to Mafia-Backed
Illegal Gambling
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Slated to Open in 2027, Monqui and AEG's New Venue Has Broken Ground at Lloyd Center
Oregon's Dismantling of Longstanding Houseless Encampment Highlights Broader
Problems
Palestine Supporters Walk Out of Regina Spektor’s Portland Show
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Dad Edition! Divorces, New Couples, and New (Proposed) Olympic
Sports
Portland School Board Candidate Withdraws From Race
The Mercury's Endorsements for the May 2024 Primary Election!
Behind the Project Pabst Unicorn With Matt Slessler
Judge Rejects Don't Shoot Portland's Request for Class Action Lawsuit
The May Primary Election Is May 21—Let the Mercury Help You Fill Out Your Ballot!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286