Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Sep 6, 2020 at 11:33 am
Photo Essay: The 100th Day of Protests in
Portland
ALEX ZIELINSKI & WM. STEVEN HUMPHREY
NATHAN HOWARD / GETTY NEWS
One hundred days, one hundred nights. That’s how long protesters have
taken their frustrations and demands for justice to the streets of Portland,
calling for an end to violent and racially biased policing. The 100th day of
demonstrations drew smaller crowds than the movement’s initial marches
in early June, but featured familiar scenes: Impassioned speeches by Black
Portlanders, traffic-halting marches led by unifying chants, and a militant
response by local law enforcement.
The day began with a number of family-friendly events held across
Portland. At Martin Luther King Jr. Elementary School, volunteers doled
out free pizza, snacks, artwork, and kids clothing while hundreds of
attendees listened to live music and various speakers from a stage set up in
the school’s baseball field. Lents Park drew a similar scene: Organizers
handed out free food—and houseplants—between speeches and hip-hop
performances.
By nightfall, several hundred protesters had regrouped in Southeast
Portland’s Ventura Park, where organizers planned a march to Portland
Police Bureau’s (PPB) East Precinct, located at SE 106 and SE Stark. The
group had barely left the park when they were confronted by a line of PPB
officers and Oregon State Police troopers, blocking the group from
marching west on SE Stark. After a PPB loudspeaker ordered the group to
disperse, the street lit up with commercial-grade fireworks and several
small fiery explosions—purportedly lit by molotov cocktails tossed from the
crowd. The explosion caught at least one person’s clothing on fire, and
nearby medics rushed to extinguished it. A number of officers also
attempted to help put out the fire. Other law enforcement officers shot
canisters of smoke and tear gas into the crowd, rushed at the protesters,
and arrested many in the process. This scene repeated itself several times as
the night went on—with the layers of tear gas drawing people out of their
homes to hand out water to protesters and yell at police for spreading a
toxic cloud of gas across their neighborhood. Videos captured by reporters
on the scene showed aggressive arrests, where officers tackled people onto
concrete and repeatedly punched protesters as they were held down by
other police.
The night ended in more than 50 arrests, according to the PPB. Two of those
arrested were carrying knives. In an early morning press release, PPB said
that several officers were injured by thrown rocks and fireworks. Because
protesters were dressed in body armor and helmets (like the police officers
who met them), PPB said “it was clear that the intent of the crowd was not
peaceful protest.”
Here’s a look at the 100th day of Portland protests, in images:
••••
[Editor's Note: The Mercury would like to thank the many freelance reporters
and photographers who risk their safety on a nightly basis to provide much-
needed information and context for these continuing protests. We appreciate
you!]
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 3     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
Wm. Steven Humphrey
Wm. Steven Humphrey is the editor-in-chief of the Portland Mercury and has held the job since
2000. (So don’t get any funny ideas.)
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Daytime Cooling Centers Reopen In Portland Tuesday Amid Extreme Heat Wave
“We Want the Same Protections”: TriMet Safety Staff Announce Union Effort
County Commissioner’s Staffer Fired After Scrutiny Over Political Activity
Fundraiser for City Councilor Displaced by Fire Creates Legal Complexity
Workers at Moda Center Renew Concerns Over Self-Serve Alcohol Sales
Portland's Most Effective Channel For Addressing Community Concerns is a Back Door
Editors' Picks
Author Q&A: Intersex Activist Alicia Roth Weigel on Her New Memoir Inverse Cowgirl
THE TRASH REPORT: Flag Girlies, Cheese Girlies, and Men Being Veep-y
THE TRASH REPORT: VP Vance? More Like GP Vance, as in Garbage Pail Vance
THE TRASH REPORT: George Santos on Taylor Swift, Me on Oprah, and Cops on Hot Mics
The Sassiest HOLIDAY Trivia Quiz Ever, Featuring Mayor McGrinch, the Best Xmas Toy of
All Time, and Too! Many! SANTAS!!
City Elections Office Upholds Campaign Penalty Against Council Candidate Rene
Gonzalez
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286