Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 9, 2020 at 4:14 pm
Communities of Color Will Help Lead
Effort to Replace Portland's Form of
Government
ALEX ZIELINSKI
Portland City Hall.
Portland City Hall. COSMONAUT / GETTY IMAGES
Local nonprofit Coalition of Communities of Color (CCC) has been hired to
help gauge Portlanders' interest in overhauling the city's current form of
government through a November 2020 vote.
CCC was selected by the City Club of Portland, a civic-minded nonprofit
that's been researching the downsides of Portland's unique government
structure for years and, more recently, has considered launching a
campaign to replace that structure in the general election.
The decision to hire CCC, an alliance of local organizations advocating for
communities of color, to gather community-level feedback about this
potential campaign is significant, as non-white Portlanders have been
particularly isolated by the city's 106-year-old system.
Portland is the only town of its size that has a "commission" form of
government—a structure that tasks five Portland commissioners, including
the mayor, with overseeing a number of massive city bureaus such as parks,
transportations, and police.
Unlike the vast majority of modern city governments, commissioners are
not elected to represent a specific region of the city, where they would be
required to live. Instead, commissioners are appointed through a citywide
election, where those with money and name recognition usually have the
best chance of winning.
More often than not, those victors are upper-middle class and white.
In November, City Club announced it was looking to hire organizations to
research if a 2020 ballot measure calling for a new form of city government
would be a success. On Thursday, it chose CCC—along with campaign
strategist Hilltop Public Solutions—to do the job.
In an email to the Mercury, CCC advocacy director Andrea Valderrama said
her organization is invested in shifting the distribution of power in Portland
politics.
"We are excited to be working in partnership with City Club of Portland,
Hilltop Public Solutions, and others in the community to run a robust and
meaningful community engagement program to gather the perspective of
stakeholders about their priorities for this important conversation,"
Valderrama wrote, "particularly the perspectives of communities that have
been historically underserved by city government like Black, indigenous,
and other people of color."
This won't be CCC's first foray into campaign research and advocacy work.
In 2018, CCC played an integral role in passing a ballot measure that
created the Portland Clean Energy Fund, a city program that taxes major
retailers to create renewable energy jobs for minority Portlanders.
CCC and Hilltop have until February 28 to gather community feedback and
create a detailed campaign plan to effectively get a measure on the
November 2020 ballot. At that point, it's up to City Club to decide whether
to go forward with a ballot measure—which would have to be submitted as
an initiative petition and approved by the city no later than July 6.
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 4     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Oregon Sues Trump’s USDA Over Yanked SNAP Benefits for Refugees
With a New Media Conglomerate on the Scene, Oregon’s News Landscape is Shrinking
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Body Camera Footage Shows Damon Lamarr Johnson Died While Restrained By Police
Multnomah County Plans Major Surge in Free Preschool Enrollment Next School Year
Updated: County Declares Emergency as Portland Faces Dangerous, Extended Heat Wave
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: Adorable Animals, Animal Behavior, and So Many More... ANIMALS! 🐿🐶
🐌😸
THE BLACK BYLINE: Netflix’s Perfect Neighbor Proves That Not All Hate Wears Hoods
THE BLACK BYLINE: I’ve Never Joined the Naked Bike Ride—But I Won’t Hate on It
Fall Arts 2022: The Portland Mercury Reintroduces Portland's Art Scene
The Mercury’s 2022 General Election Endorsements: Reinventing Local Politics
Editor’s Note: The Mercury Has a New Owner—and (Phew!) They’re Cool!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286