Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Mar 26, 2020 at 12:53 pm
Portland Clinicians Prepare for Uptick in Mental
Health Crises Due to COVID-19
ALEX ZIELINSKI
GettyImages-1156961202.jpg
RICHARD BAILEY / GETTY IMAGES
The isolation, economic instability, and general dread that has
accompanied COVID-19's arrival in the Pacific Northwest has begun to take
a mental toll on Portlanders.
During a Tuesday press conference, Portland Police Chief Jami Resch told
reporters that in the days following March 12—the day Portland declared a
state of emergency due to COVID-19—the number of 911 calls related to
suicide skyrocketed. Specifically, 911 calls involving suicide attempts or
suicide threats were up 41 percent from the same time period in 2019, and
up 23 percent from the 10-day period prior to March 12.
These statistics don't come as a surprise to longtime mental health experts.
"Personally, that's my greatest worry about the whole thing," said Dr.
Micheal Freeman, a professor of forensic epidemiology and psychiatry at
Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU). "Folks who are already living
paycheck to paycheck, who get laid off, and then are being told this thing is
huge and out of control and there's no end in sight."
People are often drawn to suicide when they're feeling a lack of control over
their lives, Freeman said. Hearing that loss of control being echoed by
public health experts, global leaders, and media outlets could make matters
worse.
"Helplessness is a bad thing for someone who has no control over their lives
other than the ability to leave it," he said.
It doesn't help that Oregon Gov. Kate Brown and local elected officials'
direction for people to stay home, while necessary to slow the spread of
COVID-19, is also likely distancing vulnerable people from family, friends,
and other social interactions.
"If you isolate someone and they're only consuming media outlets or
websites that are giving them really concerning, hopeless information...
without any external stimulus... that raises potential for that person to take
action," said Freeman.
The United States has seen a considerate increase in firearm sales since the
coronavirus began spreading across the country. First-time gun owners
have said they're concerned about looting and break-ins at their businesses
and homes, and want to be prepared for the uncertain future. To Freeman,
those numbers mean more people are able to access a weapon that could
end their life.
"The person buying the gun might just want it to protect themself and their
family," he said. "But for another person who lives in their household, it
means increased access to take action. It could be a co-factor."
Portland's uptick in suicide-related 911 calls has begun to be reflected in
calls to local mental health crisis lines.
"My clinicians are telling me that on almost every call somebody mentions
COVID-19," said Greg Border, the crisis line director for Lines for Life, a
nonprofit that operates several phone lines for people in mental health
crises across the Portland metro region. "It’s at least in the background of
what's going on, if not the core reason they're in crisis."
Border, who oversees Lines for Life's 115 operators, says it's not unusual for
calls to increase—especially from people who don't normally have mental
health issues—during an economic downturn. But what makes this current
uptick stand out is the breadth of stressors the COVID-19 pandemic has
unleashed.
"There’s so many unknown questions right now," Border said. "The calls are
coming from people who are worried about their health, worried about
being isolated, worried about [their] financial situation, worried about their
own employment, worried about their retirement. It spans everything you
can think of."
Those worries also exist within Border's own office. Usually, Lines for Life
staff are taking calls from a central office, where clinicians can support each
other in person during and after challenging calls. Now, the majority of
operators are working remotely from their homes.
"That means we have to be creative to keep that team mentality going," said
Border. "We need to work harder to know when a clinician is on tough crisis
call, so we can have someone check in on them."
But the crisis has not impacted their ability to keep the 24/7 crisis line
running, nor has it forced them to reduce staff size. Border said that while
he's "certain" that his clinicians' call volume will increase, it won't impact
Lines for Life's ability to serve the public.
"If you’re feeling isolated, we want you to call us," he said. "If you’re
somebody who’s not feeling isolated, go through the contacts on your
phone and reach out to people who might be. It could save their life."
The region's other crisis call center, run by Multnomah County, says it's hard
to tell how COVID-19 is impacting their call load. That's because it's
common for the crisis line to already be overloaded with calls this time of
year. Leticia Sainz, interim deputy director for the county's behavioral
health division, says the call center has been receiving an average of 200
calls per day for a few weeks.
"For whatever reason, springtime has always been a pretty tough time for
folks with mental health challenges, so we are already are getting an average
of 200 calls a day," said Sainz.
Sainz said she's prepared for the calls to increase in the weeks to come.
"It seems like years since this crisis began, but it’s really only been maybe
two weeks," she said. "There’s still so much to come with this specific
incident. I think with [Gov. Brown's] stay-at-home order, we're going to see
people needing more and more support from us."
Portland mental health providers are hoping to address their patients'
increased instability before it turns into an emergency. At Cascadia
Behavioral Healthcare, a nonprofit that offers mental health services and
addiction recovery support for low-income populations, staff have been
directed to reach out to clients whose mental health may be critically
worsened by the COVID-19 crisis.
"We're tying to be proactive about this, rather than just waiting for them to
reach out to us or emergency services when they're in crisis," said Dr. Jeffrey
Eisen, Cascadia's chief medical officer. Like other clinicians, Eisen is
concerned how increased isolation will hurt clients with depression,
anxiety, or mental illnesses.
While Cascadia's emergency mental health walk-in clinic remains open,
Eisen said all medical facilities are leaning more on video or telephone
appointments with clients, so as to prevent the potential spread of the
coronavirus. But not everyone has reliable access to wifi or a phone.
"We are concerned about individuals who don't have the technology to
connect... especially those who don’t have homes," said Eisen. He said
Cascadia's street and housing outreach teams have been visiting houseless
camps and low-income housing units to check in on folks in person, at a
safe distance.
"These are the most vulnerable in our community right now," said Eisen.
"We have to make sure they're not forgotten."
______
Are you or someone you know in crisis or just in need of extra support during
this time? Rely on these excellent local resources:
Call Multnomah County Crisis Line: (503) 988-4888
Call Lines for Life: (800) 273-8255
Don't want to call? Chat online with a counselor with the National Suicide
Prevention Lifeline.
Check out Multnomah County's resources for coping with anxiety during
COVID-19.
Set up an appointment with Cascadia Behavioral Health: (503) 674-7777
Visit Cascadia's Emergency Walk-In Clinic at 4212 SE Division, Suite 100.
Currently open 7 days a week from 9 am to 9 pm.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS CORONAVIRUS
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Oregon Sues Trump’s USDA Over Yanked SNAP Benefits for Refugees
City Leaders Say Trump Administration Has Sent Influx of Federal Agents to Portland
Workers at Moda Center Renew Concerns Over Self-Serve Alcohol Sales
Eviction of Disabled Veteran Halted After Intervention From Neighbors and a City
Councilor
Amid Grim Outlook for National Climate Investments, Portland’s Clean Energy Fund
Doles Out Nearly $64 Million
Recent In-Custody Death Reignites Calls For a Police-Free Crisis Response System
Editors' Picks
Monkey Business, Monica Lewinsky, Protein Thefts, and Being Cool and Slutty
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Ass Trivia About Stolen Medals, Curious Carpet, and Let's Banish
Trump!
THE TRASH REPORT: John Goodman Got Hurt, Post Malone Got Single, and Ray-Gunn's
Bro Put the Cry in Crypto Boy
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Trivia About Magic Mushrooms, Boring Football, and Which Is
Portland's Sexiest Bridge?
The Biggest Portland Police News of 2023
THE TRASH REPORT: Kiss Cams at the Coldplay Show, and Other Chaotic Choices
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286