World Subscribe
WATCH CNN
Continuing coverage after US attack on Venezuela and capture of President Nicolás
Maduro
The US successfully tested a laser
weapon that can destroy aircraft mid-
flight
By Brad Lendon, CNN
2 min read · Updated 3:56 PM EDT, Sat May 23, 2020
Video Ad Feedback
Navy tests laser that can destroy aircraft mid-flight
01:08 • Source: CNN
See more videos
Hong Kong (CNN) — A US Navy warship has successfully tested a new high-energy laser
weapon that can destroy aircraft mid-flight, the Navy’s Pacific Fleet said in a statement Friday.
Images and videos provided by the Navy show the amphibious transport dock ship USS
Portland executing “the first system-level implementation of a high-energy class solid-state
laser” to disable an aerial drone aircraft, the statement said.
The images show the laser emanating from the deck of the warship. Short video clips show
what appears to be the drone burning.
The Navy did not give a specific location of the laser weapons system demonstrator (LWSD)
test, saying only that it occurred in the Pacific on May 16.
USS Portland Downs Drone With Laser
▶▶
The power of the weapon was not disclosed, but a 2018 report from the International Institute
for Strategic Studies said it was expected to be a 150-kilowatt laser.
“B d ti d d t t t i t UAV d ll ft ill i l bl
“By conducting advanced at sea tests against UAVs and small crafts, we will gain valuable
information on the capabilities of the Solid State Laser Weapons System Demonstrator against
potential threats,” Capt. Karrey Sanders, commanding officer of Portland, said in the statement.
“With this new advanced capability, we are redefining war at sea for the Navy.”
The Navy says lasers, which it calls directed energy weapons (DEW), can be effective defenses
against drones or armed small boats.
“The Navy’s development of DEWs like the LWSD provide immediate warfighter benefits and
provide the commander increased decision space and response options,” the statement said.
In 2017, CNN witnessed a live-fire exercise of a 30-kilowatt laser weapon aboard the
amphibious transport ship USS Ponce in the Persian Gulf.
At the time, Lt. Cale Hughes, a laser weapons system officer, described how they work.
“It is throwing massive amounts of photons at an incoming object,” Hughes said. “We don’t
worry about wind, we don’t worry about range, we don’t worry about anything else. We’re able
to engage the targets at the speed of light.”
The Ponce was retired from service later that year.
Up next
US strikes vessel in eastern Pacific, killing 2
2 minute read
Coast Guard suspends search for people who abandoned ship after
US strikes on alleged drug boats
2 minute read
US military says at least eight killed in new strikes on alleged drug
boats, with survivors abandoning ship
4 minute read
A timeline of US strikes on boats that have killed 115
2 minute read
Most read
1 The US has captured Venezuelan leader Maduro. Here’s what to know
2 Trump’s snatching of Maduro shows a new level of unrestrained global power
3 Mamdani revokes Israel-related executive orders signed by Adams, directs team
to focus on housing in first acts as mayor
MORE FROM CNN
The US has
captured
Venezuelan leader
Maduro. Here’s ...
Trump’s snatching
of Maduro shows a
new level of
unrestrained ...
Mamdani revokes
Israel-related
executive orders
signed by ...
NEWS & BUZZ
The US has
captured
Venezuelan leader
Maduro. Here’s ...
Trump’s snatching
of Maduro shows a
new level of
unrestrained ...
Mamdani revokes
Israel-related
executive orders
signed by ...
Search CNN...
Subscribe
Sign in
Listen
Watch
US
World
Politics
Business
Markets
Health
CNN Underscored
Entertainment
Tech
Style
Travel
Sports
Science
Climate
Weather
Ukraine-Russia War
Israel-Hamas War
Watch
Listen
Games
About CNN
World
FOLLOW CNN
DOWNLOAD THE CNN APP
Terms of Use Privacy Policy Manage Cookies Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Subscribe Newsletters
Transcripts Help Center
© 2026 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.
CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.