Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
May 28, 2021 at 2:42 pm
Portland Clean Energy Fund Brings Equity to
Renewable Energy Investments in First Grants
ISABELLA GARCIA
A colorful drawing of several people inside a community space. There is
fresh produce on one wall and tables near the windows on the opposite
wall. The people using the space are multi-racial, several different ages, and
have different body types. One person is using a wheelchair.
A drawing of what AfroVillage Homebase, a PCEF grantee, will look like. AFROVILLAGE
The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) announced
its inaugural round of grantees last month. Also known as Portland’s
version of the Green New Deal, PCEF aims to fund climate action projects
while centering racial and social justice.
PCEF, passed as a ballot initiative in 2018, is funded through a 1 percent
business license surcharge on businesses making over $1 billion in annual
revenue and at least $500,000 in sales in the Portland area—that means big
businesses such as Walmart, Target, and Ikea. The fund expects to raise $40
to $60 million per fiscal year from the surcharge, which is then distributed
as grants for clean energy projects that benefit communities who are most
impacted by climate change, like communities of color and low income
communities. The grant committee that makes project and funding
recommendations is made up of nine volunteers who have experience in
the construction and green energy field.
PCEF is unique because it is the first municipal clean energy fund in the
nation to benefit people of color while being led by people of color. Because
the fund is the first of its kind, PCEF’s grant committee has been refining
the process by seeking input from community members who are
accustomed to being overlooked and left behind by the city when it comes
new investments.
The fund awarded its inaugural round of grants in April, doling out $8.6
million across 45 grants towards clean energy projects and workforce
development in the Portland area. According to PCEF Program Manager
Sam Baraso, this year was like a “beta year”where the grant team was able
to build the foundation for how the program works going forward. Next
year, the fund will give out $60 million in grants.
“We're now going through a long evaluation process with a lot of our grant
applicants in order to hear what worked well, what didn't work well, and
adjust the [application] questions, but the first year was largely a success,”
Baraso said.
The bulk of the grants, about 40 to 60 percent, are awarded to projects that
do repairs and upgrades like installing solar panels or improving a
building’s energy efficiency. Then, 20 to 25 percent funds workforce
development, and 10 to 15 percent is used for regenerative agriculture, like
planting vegetation that sequesters carbon from the environment naturally.
Because it’s the program’s first year, Baraso said they also wanted to “seed”
the beginnings of several new projects, which is why majority of the grants
awarded are for project planning. Previous recipients of grants are eligible
and encouraged to reapply, so Baraso hopes the recipients of the planning
grants will reapply next year when they’re ready for next steps.
That’s what the creators of AfroVillage Homebase, a cultural and
community hub for Portlanders of color with a focus on women and people
experiencing housing insecurity, plan to do.
AfroVillage Homebase is the brainchild of LaQuida Landford, a Portland
housing justice advocate, and Marta Petteni, a designer working with
Portland State University’s (PSU) Homelessness Research and Action
Collaborative (HRAC). Landford previously worked as a housing case
worker with Urban League of Portland and wanted to create a space where
housed and unhoused people of color, particularly Black women, could
receive services like food and shelter while being in community together.
Inspired by homeless villages like Right 2 Dream Too, Landford started
collaborating with HRAC where she met Petteni.
“I wasn't just talking about a tiny village, I’m talking about a cultural center
for community that's been displaced from all over, so that we can see
ourselves in the city of Portland,” said Landford.
The design for AfroVillage Homebase was originally developed for the MAX
Reuse Design Challenge, a competition hosted by PSU’s Center for Public
Interest Design that asked participants to re-envision the use of
decommissioned MAX train cars. Landford and Petteni designed a three-
car “village” with each car having a theme: hygiene, food, and therapy. Each
car has six beds in one half and theme-specific services in the other, like
showers or a meditation and fitness space. The cultural service hub is being
designed to operate through net-zero and solar-powered energy models.
According to Landford, therapy and healing is what is missing from
Portland’s homeless services landscape. In her previous work with
unhoused people in Old Town, Landford would rent a hotel room and invite
unhoused women to take showers and recoup, and give each woman a
journal so they could take time to reflect on their emotions and express
themselves.
“I just have them share any thoughts that come to their mind for
themselves, not for me, but so that they can feel like they are in community
again,” Landford said. Therapy is a way for people to stay grounded,
Landford says, and she believes providing restorative healing services is a
key part of reintroducing people to housing.
Landford and Petteni’s design won the "People's Choice Award" at the MAX
design competition, so they applied for a PCEF grant to help turn the
project into a reality. Petteni says that the $98,412 PCEF planning grant is
key to transitioning their creative dream into a functional design, which
may mean tweaking the number of MAX trains used and figuring out what
renewable energy technology will be needed to power the center.
“What is really complicated too is that we are trying a very new and
innovative pathway of doing things because we know that what brought us
here in the first place is not working as a solution,” Petteni said of existing
homeless service models. “But, it means a lot of work in terms of testing
and exploring and figuring out things, because everything is kind of new.”
The AfroVillage duo were also new to the world of grant applications; the
PCEF grant and a Metro Community Placemaking grant applications were
the first they had ever submitted. That’s something the PCEF grant
committee was conscious of when creating the request for proposals (RFP).
When designing the RFP, the grant committee heard input from over 110
community members on what outcomes they wanted to see from the PCEF
projects and what application questions should be included to elicit those
outcomes. When the committee finished the first draft of the RFP they sent
it back out to those community members for another round of feedback,
asking whether the language was accessible.
“We clearly made some big errors [in our first RFP draft] and we got a lot of
feedback,” Michael Edden Hill, PCEF grant committee co-chair, said. “We
went back to the drawing board and we redid a lot of it.”
For example, the first version of the RFP asked for people to calculate the
carbon savings from the project, but Edden Hill says that is a finicky,
scientific task that requires resources and a level of expertise many of the
organizations PCEF intended to assist didn’t have access to. Concerned
that the question would act as a barrier, the grant committee removed it
from the RFP in favor of a more general question about projected energy
savings.
The grant committee also recognized the financial burden that even
applying for a grant can place on small organizations, so PCEF launched
mini application assistance grants that compensated organizations for the
time and effort needed to develop a proposal, or allow them to hire
specialists to calculate the effectiveness of their proposed project.
As a “quasi-government agency,” Edden Hill said it was important for the
grant committee to acknowledge they were “representing a system that has
historically disenfranchised people of color,” and make conscious efforts to
combat any further disenfranchisement while developing the RFP.
Another way the committee did that was by proactively reaching out to
cultural communities they did not hear from during the initial request for
comment, instead of continuing forward without their input. The RFP also
asked applicants to detail their history with the priority population that
would be impacted by their project, confirming that organization had a
proven history of meaningfully engaging with the particular racial, ethic, or
socioeconomic community they were intending to help.
According to Baraso, ensuring organizations have community connections
is critical to completing the pipeline from PCEF to the people most
impacted by climate change, as is exemplified by PCEF grantee Community
Energy Project (CEP).
CEP is a nonprofit that provides free energy efficiency home services like
improving home insulation and upgrading to energy-saving appliances.
CEP’s $800,000 PCEF project will make major energy retrofits and repairs to
20 homes owned by low income, Black Portlanders in the historic Albina
area. The retrofits, like replacing and weatherizing a roof or converting a
house from oil to electric heating, are expected to reduce energy use by an
average of 55 percent and decrease the homeowners’ utility bills by 38
percent.
CEP started doing this work in the Albina area, Portland’s historically Black
neighborhood, 40 years ago and have built a relationship with their clients
and larger community over time. CEP’s executive director Charity Fain has
heard first hand the skepticism low income Portlanders and communities
of color have in promises made by the city, especially when it comes to
green and renewable energy investments. Even with PCEF’s explicit mission
of investing in communities most impacted by climate change, Fain notes
that some of the 20 homeowners are reserving their excitement for when
there are actually people in their house installing the retrofits.
“They trust us to do what we say we're going to do and show up,” Fain said.
“I definitely hear some skepticism, but that's our job to go in and be like,
‘No, this is really happening, this program is different.’ This program is going
to look at real barriers, and provide the services.”
As the inaugural round of grantees start planning and enacting their
projects, Edden Hill hopes the success of the fund will not only be
measured in the number of people helped or the amount of energy watts
saved, but in the social experiences and stories that the projects generate.
“Was someone inspired to garden or get into the clean energy field?” Edden
Hill said. “Did you create a new farmer? Did you create a green space that
makes your community a little calmer or a little cooler? I think those stories
are great metrics of success as opposed to only ‘how many metric tons of
carbon did you sequester?’”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Despite State Transportation Funding Crisis, Construction Begins on I-5 Rose Quarter
Project
PSU Sheds Staff After Expedited Return-To-Office Requirement
"Secretary of War" Pete Hegseth Issues Order to Activate Oregon National Guard in
Portland
“We’re Investing for the Long Term”: How the Future of Portland’s Historic Albina
District is Coming Together
The Lawsuit that Broke the Council’s Back
Workers at Moda Center Renew Concerns Over Self-Serve Alcohol Sales
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: How Much Do YOU Remember About 2023? 🤔
Weather is Trash, Mark Wahlberg has an App for That, Millennials are Old, and Keiko's
Legacy
POP QUIZ PDX Special Edition: Let's Play... RANKED CHOICE VOTING!
A Tenant Enrolled in a City Affordable Housing Program Just Received a 50 Percent Rent
Increase. How is That Possible?
Sassy Trivia Questions About Loudmouth Frat Boys, Annoying TV Hosts, and Local Rich
Dudes Misspending their Moolah!
Say Nice Things About Portland… Again!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286