Family Sharing is here! Subscribe to Premium Access for $5
PORTLAND
Portland launches easy-entry jobs program that
cleans up trash
Updated: Apr. 15, 2021, 11:30 a.m.|Published: Apr. 15, 2021, 7:00 a.m.
Terry Blaka picks up trash as part of the city of Portland's partnership with Ground Score. / Brodie Cass Talbott
4,582 shares
By Nicole Hayden | The Oregonian/OregonLive
Before the sun even started to warm the day, a team of four people pulled
two red wagons onto a MAX train Monday. They got off near the Portland
Convention Center and headed to work with their supplies in tow: garbage
bags, plastic gloves, trash pickers and brooms.
They were tasked with picking up rubbish that spanned a handful of city
blocks clustered in the Lloyd Center area. Their latex-covered hands picked
up discarded coffee cups, empty food containers, soiled clothes and a
printer-fax machine.
Advertisement
No Download Required
Chumba Casino|Sponsored Play for free
PPoorrttllaanndd HHoouussiinngg AAuutthhoorriittyy RReevveerrsseess PPllaannnneedd RReenntt HHiikkeess aatt TTwwoo BBuuiillddiinnggss Read More
The city of Portland has partnered with a nonprofit initiative named Ground
Score, to tackle two needs: address the cityʼs growing trash problem and
provide job opportunities open to people experiencing homelessness and
whoʼve only recently found housing.
“The program is incredibly successful,ˮ said Barbra Weber, the Ground
Score employee leading Mondayʼs crew. “But not for the obvious reasons,
like the fact we have picked up so much trash. The bigger picture is the
personal impact.ˮ
The pilot program, which launched in mid-February, has employed nearly
30 people who are paid $20 an hour and have already collected more than
15,000 pounds of trash. The hours are flexible, allowing people to sign up
for four- or eight-hour shifts when it fits their schedule. They can sign up
for a single shift or ask to be scheduled on an ongoing basis.
Weber, who is paid $25 an hour as the coordinator, typically schedules two
people for each shift and leaves one spot open to allow someone to show
up that morning to ask for work. Soon, paid sick time will be built into the
program.
Advertisement
50% off
While the program currently has five clean-up locations between the Lloyd
Center and Downtown, the goal is to expand city wide, said Katie Lindsay,
the coordinator for the cityʼs Homelessness and Urban Camping Impact
Reduction Program who launched the partnership with Ground Score, an
initiative of Trash for Peace that promotes community sustainability.
She wants other city departments to begin offering low-barrier jobs as well.
The county has similar goals in mind. Multnomah Countyʼs lead
homelessness official is proposing to spend $3 million from the Metro
homelessness services bond on a jobs initiative that would hire 100 low-
skilled workers in the coming year beginning July 1. That allocation will
depend on whether County Chair Deborah Kafoury puts the request in her
executive budget and the full commission approves it.
“(The money) could connect to the cityʼs pilot program, those are some of
the details that still need to be worked out,ˮ said Denis Theriault,
communications coordinator for the joint city-county Office of Homeless
Services. “We have a whole mess of partners doing similar work, so we will
have to figure out how best to deploy this funding to amplify and fill gaps.ˮ
Advertisement
80% off 50% off
While the handful of blocks the Ground Score program focuses on are
much cleaner, the program will not solve all the cityʼs trash woes. However,
the initiative has already deeply impacted those it has employed, Weber
said.
THE PERSONAL IMPACT
The objective of the program, Lindsay said, is to offer people work
opportunities that have typically eluded them due to circumstance. Being
employed while experiencing homelessness is challenging, so providing
jobs that are flexible lowers barriers to working while unhoused.
“We arenʼt giving charity, but as a government, we are trying to find out
how we excluded people from opportunities in the past and make those
opportunities (like fair-paying city jobs) available for anyone,ˮ she said.
Barbra Weber and Ryan Fletcher pick up trash as part of the city of Portland's partnership with Ground Score. / Brodie
Cass Talbott
Terry Blaka, 48, a frequent worker on Weberʼs team, said the job is his sole
source of income and has changed his life. He is currently living in
transitional housing, waiting for a permanent housing placement.
“(The job) has helped me change my habits,ˮ he said as he sat down to wait
for the MAX after a three-hour shift on his feet picking up trash. “It is an
honor to be a productive member of society and itʼs a wonderful feeling
how much people say they appreciate what we are doing as they walk by.ˮ
Advertisement
50% off
Bud Foteff, who owns the Convention Center Auto Body shop, walked out of
his shop to say hello on Monday as Weberʼs team walked by on their route –
something he does each time he sees them.
“The area behind my building was such a mess and I used to spend so
much time picking up everything myself,ˮ Foteff said. “Itʼs just amazing the
noticeable huge difference they have made.ˮ
About half of those employed by the program are currently homeless while
the other half are newly housed, Weber said. But both need job
opportunities – moving into a home after living on the streets can be a hard
transition, she said.
“When people first call to ask about a job, I can hear the nervousness in
their voice,ˮ Weber said. “But as time moves on, when they realize this truly
is low barrier, you can see that stress lift off when they realize they donʼt
have to be anything but themselves.ˮ
The program is built to be inclusive and span physical abilities. Some trash
routes are an easy walk around town while others entail heavy lifting and
arduous work. Weber noted one worker has schizophrenia and twitches as
he works.
Advertisement
“Maybe others might exclude him, but we just keep on working,ˮ she said. “I
also have some people who are still hard into their addiction, but for the
time they are working, they are sober and interacting and feeling good. Our
folks run the gamut of age and disability.ˮ
As the team moved from one block to the other, they ran into Steve Schaff,
54, who has picked up work with Ground Score in the past. He yelled from
his bike: “Hey, is that Ground Score?ˮ and Weber yelled back, telling him
she had him down on her worker list and would be calling him soon.
Another man passed by and asked her if she had a business card – he was
interested in work too.
Terry Blaka picks up trash as part of the city of Portland's partnership with Ground Score. / Brodie Cass Talbott
“(The program) gave me structure,ˮ Schaff said. “It really has helped our
homeless community, and it gave me something that I had to be on time for
on a certain day and time.ˮ
Weber said she is continually floored at the impact the program has
provided to individuals camping along the street. Some are physically
disabled and have a hard time cleaning their tent area on their own.
Advertisement
When campers saw the team approach Monday, they began cleaning up
their own spaces and walked bags of trash over to the red wagons. Weber
offered them fresh garbage bags in exchange.
“Thank you, appreciate you,ˮ one man said as the team carted his garbage
away.
James Smith, 34, poked his head out of his blue tent. He asked the team
not to touch one collection of what appeared to be trash but said everything
else is fair game. Blaka, one of the workers, noted that he has learned a lot
about the community in the past couple months: “Iʼve learned how to
interact with people, especially when asking people if we can clean up their
spaces. Itʼs peopleʼs foundations we are talking about, itʼs all they got.ˮ
Smith said the block that he calls home has improved since the trash team
has started making regular rounds. By the end of the Monday shift, the
team had filled five bags with 90 pounds of trash, a metric they measure
with small handheld scales from which they hang each trash bag to check
its heft.
Advertisement
“What they do, it helps take the heat and stress off,ˮ Smith said. “Some
people who were living in tents nearby were swept because their areas
were really messy. This helps us keep our area clean. I really do appreciate
what they do.ˮ
Nicole Hayden reports on homelessness for The Oregonian|OregonLive.
She can be reached at nhayden@oregonian.com or on Twitter
@Nicole_A_Hayden.
About Us
Our Journalists
About OregonLive.com
Contact The Newsroom
Technical Support
Advertise With Us
Subscribe to The Oregonian
Subscriber Services
Digital Subscription FAQ
Delivery Opportunities
Accessibility Statement
Subscriptions
The Oregonian
eNewspaper
Email Newsletters
Already a Subscriber
Manage your Subscription
Place a Vacation Hold
Make a Payment
Delivery Feedback
Read More Top News
Today's Top News
Politics
Crime
Business
Commuting
Weather
Education
Homes & Gardens
Letters to the Editor
Video
Environment
Here is Oregon
Noticias en español
Special Sections
Sports
High School Sports
Ducks
Beavers
Trail Blazers
Timbers
Thorns
Recruiting News
Entertainment
Travel
TV & Movies
Eat, Drink, Cook
Comics
Your Regional News Pages
Portland
Washington County
Clackamas County
Clark County
Pacific Northwest
Follow Us
Email Newsletters
YouTube
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
RSS
Mobile
iPhone, Android apps
Tablet apps
More on OregonLive.com
Place an Ad
Autos
Jobs
Sponsor Content
Post a Job
Newspapers.com Archive
Your Privacy Rights Your Privacy Choices Privacy Policy | User Agreement | Ad Choices
Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement,
(updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights
(updated 1/1/2026).
© 2026 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used,
except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.
Ad Choices