NEWS SUPPORT
The City Is Inching Toward a New Carbon Tax Even as the
Portland Clean Energy Fund Is Awash in Cash
The fund has generated far more money than even its most enthusiastic boosters imagined.
ByNigel Jaquiss | Published on August 18, 2021 6:50AM PDT
Carbon Tax REHEATED: A resurrected carbon tax still leaves the owners of Evraz Steel dissatisfied. (Wesley Lapointe)
Portland city officials tasked with meeting the city’s ambitious carbon reduction goals are
attempting to resurrect a tax on smokestack industries.
Documents from the Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability show that bureau
officials hope to raise about $8 million a year from industrial companies whose factories
belch carbon along the Willamette River and near the airport. BPS would use that money to
Get Portland’s top stories delivered, every morning.
meet its goal of cutting carbon emissions in half by 2030 and reducing them to zero by 2050.
Subscribe to our Daily Primer.
ThEomsea igl oAadlsd rbeescsa *me more urgent last week, when the United Nations released a doomsday
climate report its secretary general called “a code red for humanity.” In a summer of lethal
heat and choking wildfires, Portlanders are encountering substantial evidence of climate
change.
Subscribe
BPS officials insist they can think globally by taxing locally.
But the bureau’s coffers are already overflowing with the windfall from a different tax that
Portland voters approved in 2018.
NNOOWW SSTTRREEAAMMIINNGG
That tax, the PortlandSS IICGGlNNe UUanPP NNEOOnWWergy Fund, has generated far more money than even its most
enthusiaPPsLLtAAiNNc SSb SSoTToAAsRRtTTe AArsTT i$$m9999a99//gMMinOOeNNdTT:HH $109 million so far, with another $52 million expected this
year.
ADVERTISING
FEATURED POST
Enjoy a “Winter Chill-Out” in Rockaway Beach
Sponsored Content
THE LATEST
DRINK
Deadstock Coffee Is Alive in Old Town
FOOD
What We’re Cooking This Week: Radicchio Fried Rice With Hot Honey
That’s led some members of a stakeholder group that BPS Commissioner Carmen Rubio
convened to ask: Why not tap that existing surplus rather than impose another tax that
CITY
might have unintendeGd actoewnsaey qIsu Wenhceerse? Good Intentions Stumbled
It’s not just manufacturing interests asking that question. In fact, WW has obtained a
document showing that some members of Rubio’s panel—Democrats who believe lowering
emissions should be an urgent priority—want Portland to use PCEF money aggressively to
COURTS
Mother Forced to Dig Up Son’s Burial Vault
cut emissions.
“It’s an alternative that is worth a longer conversation,” says John Tapogna, president of the
consulting firm ECONorthwest and a member of Rubio’s panel. “The tax has brought in far
GIVE!GUIDE
more than voters wereG ilveed!G tuoi deex pReaciste.”s $9.2 Million for Portland-Area Nonprofits
PCEF’s primary goal—like that of the proposed carbon tax—is to reduce carbon emissions,
although through grants to nonprofits that will benefit communities of color.
NEWS
WW’s Most-Read Stories of 2025
City officials say the idea of dipping into the PCEF is a nonstarter because the ballot
measure that created the fund strictly limits its use to grants to nonprofits that will generate
green energy projects and jobs for communities of color.
NEWS
Multnomah County to Shut Sunstone Way’s Market Street Shelter
When the PCEF question arose in an Aug. 17 BPS briefing of industry leaders, Kyle Dreiser,
the bureau’s point person on the new tax, batted it away. “That money is restricted for
community grants,” he said.
NEWS
Trump Indicates He Will Send Oregon National Guard Members Home
The city has tried before to create its own carbon tax, touting what would have been the
first such tax by a city in the nation. Late last year, the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability
R d M
proposed a two-part tax on heavy industry. The idea would have raised about $11 million
annually.
Strong opposition from prospective payers, including the two biggest targets of the tax,
Evraz Steel and the Owens-Brockway glass plant in North and Northeast Portland,
respectively, sidelined that proposal (“Glass Houses,” WW, Jan. 27, 2021).
But the carbon tax is not dead.
Rubio, who took over the bureau in January, has looked for a compromise. After consulting
critics of the original proposal, the commissioner convened a workgroup led by her special
projects staffer Jillian Schoene that met five times from April through August.
The tentative new idea: Significant industrial polluters would each undergo an emissions
audit in preparation for a new tax. That tax would be about $17.70 per ton, the price
California has assigned to carbon. That’s less than the $25 per ton embedded in the city’s
earlier proposal.
And the new tax is aimed at being more than just what critics earlier called a “cash grab.”
Instead of the city keeping all of the tax to pay for new emission reduction programs, the
affected companies would get 40% to 60% of the money back to invest in improvements to
lower emissions.
Corky Collier, executive director of the Columbia Corridor Association, a trade group that
includes most of the city’s heavy industry, gives Rubio high marks for listening to critics and
running a collaborative process.
He’s still not sure he likes the carbon tax. While Collier says the idea of companies being
allowed to reinvest some of their tax payments is an improvement, it’s not an incentive to
reduce pollution.
“Why only give us back 40 to 60 percent?” he asks. “Why not 100%?”
In other words, business leaders are frustrated that the city is still trying to generate more
money to fund climate policy rather than creating specific carbon reduction targets.
ADVERTISING
Dexcom-Sponsored
An easier way to manage diabetes
With Dexcom G7, you can see your glucose and where it's headed in real-time,
making it easier to make in-the-moment decisions about food and...
i ⌃
David Kenney, a spokesman for Evraz Steel, the city’s largest carbon emitter, notes BPS
doesn’t really need the money. “It doesn’t make sense given how much money they are
sitting on,” he says.
That’s indeed the case. In November 2018, voters passed the Portland Clean Energy Fund to
jump-start energy efficiency projects and jobs for Portlanders historically left behind. The
chief petitioners promised in the Voters’ Pamphlet the measure “will bring in $30 million
every single year.”
It’s done far more than that.
As of July 1 of the current fiscal year, the PCEF had $109 million on hand, according to city
officials, and it expects to generate $52 million in new revenue this year.
Most of the tax dollars are sitting unused in a city bank account—and are not going to any
green energy projects in the foreseeable future.
The fund distributed about $9 million in grants last year and hopes to hand out $60 million
this year. If it succeeds in doing that, PCEF will still have around $100 million sitting in the
bank at year’s end.
That’s about 12 times what the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability would raise with the
revised carbon tax on heavy industry.
Some members of Rubio’s carbon workgroup noticed the paradox.
A document they put together, written by former Multnomah County Commissioner Jules
Bailey and others, suggests borrowing against future receipts from the PCEF tax—but only
touching the surplus above the $30 million a year that the fund expected to raise.
Borrowing against future revenues would allow aggressive, immediate investments in carbon
reduction—electric vehicle fleets, vast solar arrays, renewable hydrogen, etc.—while also still
fulfilling the equity and job creation goals of the ballot measure.
“By bringing the long-run value of PCEF into the present, Portland can ensure the existence
of the fund, protect the promise it brings to frontline communities, and invest critical
money when it matters most: now,” says the document.
But that idea is going nowhere because of the restrictions on the money, which could only
be loosened by a vote of the Portland City Council. Schoene says no talks are scheduled to
take any such action.
However, the bureau is still consulting stakeholders about the most effective way to battle
the climate emergency, Schoene adds.
“We have shifted away from the original, draft proposal to one in which the city is working
with industry [and] large institutions to directly invest in them,” she says, “plans that they
have control over, with a shared goal to reduce carbon over time to the benefit of those
most impacted by climate change and poor air quality.”
The city will open a 60-day public comment period on the proposal after Labor Day.
Schoene says the policy that emerges is unlikely to come before the City Council for a
hearing before December.
Collier says members of his association appreciate the city’s willingness to listen—but warns
that the city’s search for money it doesn’t need could have unintended consequences.
“If you shun industry in Portland and send companies elsewhere, they are going to be even
bigger emitters,” he says. “What you actually do with badly designed policy is increase
emissions worldwide.”
Nigel Jaquiss | njaquiss@oregonjournalismproject.org
Reporter Nigel Jaquiss joined the Oregon Journalism project in 2025 after 27 years at Willamette Week.
Willamette Week’s reporting has concrete impacts that change laws, force action from
civic leaders, and drive compromised politicians from public office.Support WW
SUPPORT
Around The Web
Knee Surgeons CVS Hides This $1 Top Cardiologist: If
Baffled: New Device Generic Viagra - You Drink Almond
Relieves Years of Here’s The Aisle It's Milk Every Day, This
Knee Pain Really in is What Happens
RejuvaKnee Friday Plans Well Being For All
If Your Dog Licks Its Beat The Cold in BFCM Starts Early:
Paws, Stop Feeding Style With This Save 20% on Top-
Them This Essential Winter Hat Shelf Cannabis
Immediately Products
Glosritystore
ExpertsInPetHealth Mood
Seniors Born 1939- This High-Quality Sleep Apnea Pillow
1969 Receive 11 German Nail Clipper Goes Viral: 1000s
Benefits This Month is Designed for Say They Finally
If They Ask Seniors All Over The Sleep Deeply
World
Super Saving Online Health Wellness Daily
Peoasis
Read More
00:05 03:18
Sponsored
ALSO ON WILLAMETTE WEEK
3 days ago •1 comment 9 days ago •3 comments
HHeeaalltthh CCaarree WWhhyy DDoo
SSyysstteemmss AArree AAiirrlliinneess TTeellll
CCoonnffuussiinngg.. …… PPaasssseennggeerrss ……
Sponsored
Replay
Willamette Week Comment Policy
Comments that are irrelevant or incendiary will be deleted. Got it
Disruptive users will be banned at WW's discretion.
What do you think?
6 Responses
Upvote Funny Love Surprised Angry Sad
37 Comments  1 Login
G
Join the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS ?
Name
Want more?
Subscribe to Willamette Week's newsletter to get the best of each issue delivered straight to your inbox.
✉ Enter email address Subscribe
Hide this message
 Share Best Newest Oldest
D Dubious − ⚑
4 years ago edited
Hey, Kyle Dreiser, what community projects have been funded to date? What were their
objectives? What were their outcomes? What community projects are on the drawing board?
When will the next round of grants be offered?
6 0 Reply ⥅
Laughing At Liberals − ⚑
4 years ago
It's not about "carbon", has never been about "carbon", never will be about "carbon". It's all
about the money.
5 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus > Laughing At Liberals 4 years ago − ⚑
You forgot "control". Because that's another imaginary thing "conservatives" are
obsessed with.
1 3 Reply ⥅
Laughing At Liberals > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
DON'T TELL ME WHAT I FORGOT!
2 1 Reply ⥅
Risk Manager > Do0fus 4 years ago edited − ⚑
Government control is not imaginary. If you want to control something all
you have to do is get a law passed. That's how we control speed on our
highways. Try again.
0 0 Reply ⥅
BurgerBill56 > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
Control? Got your shots yet free person?
0 0 Reply ⥅
B Bob Steets − ⚑
4 years ago edited
Who is getting paid to manage this money?
Make sure your answer is in the form of a question.
5 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus > Bob Steets − ⚑
4 years ago
Sounds like it's not being managed, if you mean the PCEF. It's just sitting in an
account generating nothing. Because it was assumed to have been much less annually
and would be given away every year.
0 0 Reply ⥅
−−
This comment was deleted.
J Just doing the Math > Guest 4 years ago edited − ⚑
J
That info is probably intentionally difficult to get. Have you ever tried to get
info from the city or state with some of these programs that grant money? It
is impossible.
2 0 Reply ⥅
Roger Neilson − ⚑
4 years ago
"City officials say the idea of dipping into the PCEF is a nonstarter because the ballot measure
that created the fund strictly limits its use to grants to nonprofits that will generate green
energy projects and jobs for communities of color."
SO does the large surplus mean the need doesn't exist? Or maybe it's poorly advertised and
people don't know of it? If the city can't get the money out as intended then maybe it's time to
shut the tax down.
4 0 Reply ⥅
S Smoked Armadillo − ⚑
4 years ago
Meanwhile...vagrancy related environmental contamination remains
3 0 Reply ⥅
BurgerBill56 > Smoked Armadillo 4 years ago edited − ⚑
Perhaps the city should hire some of the homeless to rearrange their garbage into
"artistic installations" and pay them thousands of dollars for it... They sure don't have
any problem paying other "artists" tens of thousands for artwork that looks like
garbage...
1 0 Reply ⥅
J Just doing the Math − ⚑
4 years ago edited
"That tax, the Portland Clean Energy Fund, has generated far more money than even its
most enthusiastic boosters imagined: $109 million so far, with another $52 million expected
this year."
"Most of the tax dollars are sitting unused in a city bank account—and are not going to any
green energy projects in the foreseeable future."
Wasn’t there another recent article in WW “Only $10 Million of the $152 Million Requested in
Rent Assistance Since May 19 Has Been Distributed to Oregon Renters” that described a
similar issue with the lack of taxpayer money distribution?
This is another example of hanging on to the cash. There is no plan for distribution of this
money. Voters will forget, and the money approved by voters will continue to grow unused
until it “disappears” into the pockets of bureaucrats’ and non-profit executives.
3 0 Reply ⥅
Laughing At Liberals > Just doing the Math 4 years ago − ⚑
When it comes to taking the money from us, the government will do all it can to make
that happen. When it comes to doling it, out, well, good luck.
If you call the employment department about an unemployment claim, you wait on
hold for hours, if you can get through at all. Call the dept of revenue and you'll be on
with a live person within 2 minutes.
1 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus > Laughing At Liberals 4 years ago − ⚑
Why are you using a socialist system like unemployment, commie?
0 1 Reply ⥅
Laughing At Liberals > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
Whoever said I was? It's been all over the news for the last year
and a half, people trying to get through to the unemployment dept.
1 0 Reply ⥅
Sponsored
B Brandon Lessgo > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
Unemployment is an insurance paid for by employers.
0 0 Reply ⥅
BurgerBill56 > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
You need to look up the definition of Socialism Doofus... Hint: It
doesn't involve employers paying unemployment insurance for
their employees...
0 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus >JustdoingtheMath 4yearsago edited − ⚑
Do0fus > Just doing the Math 4 years ago edited − ⚑
The story on rent assistance says upfront it's due to lack of staffing by the non-profits
processing the claims, not because of "hanging on" to the cash.
Also people just aren't applying. As the story notes - "Clackamas, Jackson,
Multnomah and Washington counties have the smallest percentage of applications
that have been submitted for funding: 2%, 3%, 3% and 5%, respectively."
0 1 Reply ⥅
Hemoglobin − ⚑
4 years ago
All this money can go to cleaning up garbage around Portland and building a large
incarceration / rehab center. Climate change is going to need a much more broad approach
than a local fund, so at least we can do our part locally by taking care of what we have first.
3 0 Reply ⥅
S Steverino − ⚑
4 years ago
People, spare me if you think CoP gives rats a$$ about carbon / homeless / schools /
affordable housing.
These are all convenient excuses for more new taxes that won't be spent on named thing. You
think those policy / consultant / DEI people are cheap?
2 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus > Steverino − ⚑
4 years ago
Uh, wut? You literally believe the phrase "tax & spend liberal" now merely means "tax
& don't spend liberal"?
0 0 Reply ⥅
S Steverino > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
I literally believe the phrase "tax & don't spend on what you promised
liberal" now merely means "tax & spend on other stuff liberal"?
3 0 Reply ⥅
Do0fus > Steverino 4 years ago − ⚑
So - you're not actually reading the article?
0 0 Reply ⥅
S Steverino > Do0fus 4 years ago edited − ⚑
So - you're not actually seeing what CoP does with new taxes like
for the arts and homelessness? Don't forget they already have a
carbon tax they're not spending on carbon.
0 0 Reply ⥅
S Smoked Armadillo > Do0fus 4 years ago − ⚑
We should be spending more liberally on harm reduction approach and
permissive outreach efforts in wealthy neighborhoods popular with liberal
leaders.
0 0 Reply ⥅
JohnQPublicthe3rd − ⚑
4 years ago
The City changed the rules for the Arts Tax, they can change the rules for this. It's an easy fix.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Dr Snuggles − ⚑
4 years ago
How about a silicon tax? Silicon valley has more money power and influence on our society
than ever. They lecture us, tell us how to live while not practicing what they preach. They work
to undermine America for their own profit, dictating foreign, domestic and online policy. A tax
on silicon can help alleviate some of the damage they have done.
0 0 Reply ⥅
S Steverino > Dr Snuggles 4 years ago edited − ⚑
Maybe you should rethink this. If we lose Intel, we really have no high-tech
American-owned manufacturing. Besides, what exact damage have they done?
Unless you can find another less-offensive employer for Oregon that pays 20K people
$100K/year.
Didn't think so.
0 0 Reply ⥅
−−
This comment was marked as spam.
Risk Manager > Brian Owendoff 4 years ago − ⚑
Your problem, Brian, is that you are using logic. That won't go well here. I, of course,
congratulate you on your pristine thinking.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Ryan Shanahan − ⚑
4 years ago
It's important to consider that a carbon tax provides 2 outcomes. One is to raise money but the
other is to encourage less consumption and greater efficiencies. Going after PCEF funds
instead of the carbon tax won't help us achieve the 2nd outcome.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Tim > Ryan Shanahan − ⚑
4 years ago
You're forgetting the 3rd one where carbon intensive industries just move operations
to Mexico or China and get lower wages + lower taxes.
5 0 Reply ⥅
Ryan Shanahan > Tim 4 years ago − ⚑
Too true. It's almost like we need to respond to climate change globally or
something...
0 0 Reply ⥅
Hemoglobin > Tim 4 years ago − ⚑
“If you shun industry in Portland and send companies elsewhere, they are
going to be even bigger emitters,” he says. “What you actually do with badly
designed policy is increase emissions worldwide.”
Amazing how all the well intended public support to address pollution and
climate issues have in fact sent industry including mining to areas without
environment considerations included in trade agreements.
0 0 Reply ⥅
LatishaJ − ⚑
4 years ago edited
DEQ has existed for decades, they failed to prevent the Bullseye glass toxic waste, they failed to
prevent the precision Castparts toxic waste, they failed to prevent the EPA superfund toxic
waste at Intel, they failed to prevent the EPA superfund toxic waste at the waterfront, this list
could go on and on and on…
But this “new” division of government who is receiving magnitudes more money than
needed/planned will graciously give back 40-60% of what they take if companies use the
money how/when/what they say to use it on, and this new group “definitely won’t fail like deq
has over and over”??
I call b.s.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Help us dig deeper.
Contribute to Local Journalism.
Donate
Find a Paper About WW
Sign up for our Newsletters Add Your Event To Our Calendar
Subscribe or Get a Back Issue Advertise
Become a Friend of Willamette Week Work With Us
Contribute or Intern
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Twitter Get Portland's top stories delivered straight to
YouTube your inbox, everyday.
Facebook
Instagram Email Address *
Bluesky
RSS Feeds
Subscribe