WEATHER ALERT
There are 8 areas under alert. Click for alert details.
MULTNOMAH COUNTY
Portland Clean Energy Fundʼs unspent cash hits $169 million
TRIBUNE PHOTO: JONATHAN HOUSE – Activists rallied during rush hour in 2018 in front of the Southeast 82nd Avenue Walmart in support of the creation of a Portland …
Read More
The 1% surcharge on large retailers has collected significantly more revenue than originally expected.
by: Zane Sparling/Portland Tribune
Posted: Oct 26, 2021 / 11:45 AM PDT
Updated: Oct 26, 2021 / 11:45 AM PDT
SHARE
The Portland Tribune is a KOIN 6 media partner.
PORTLAND, Ore. (Portland Tribune) — The Portland Clean Energy Fund is in the black — and then some.
According to the latest revenue figures from this month, the PCEF fund balance has reached $169 million. That tally is divided into two pools:
$96.3 million in unappropriated money, as well as another $72.8 million being held in contingency.
47°
✕
For comparison, the Energy Fund — which is powered by a 1% surcharge on retailers with revenue of $500,000 here and $1 billion nationally —
had just $109 million in its coffers as recently as July 1.
The city says the infusion of extra cash was collected from taxpayers who took advantage of the grace period in tax year 2019, as well as from
higher-than-anticipated tax revenues last year.
“Long story short, we began collecting money before the PCEF program was staffed and subsequently scaled up,” spokeswoman Eden Dabbs
said. “And our distribution of grant money is lagging behind incoming funds, but we should reach input/output equilibrium within three to four
years.”
ADVERTISEMENT
Only a fraction of the money collected has gone out the door so far, via a series of microgrants — some $200,000 released for capacity building
and an $8.6 million allocation this spring that funded 45 grants, of which 29 were focused on planning future projects.
But the Clean Energy Fund has put $60 million up for grabs during a third round of grant funding that opened last month, with nonprofits likely
to submit proposals for regenerative agriculture, green infrastructure, carbon emission cutbacks and other ideas that primarily benefit the poor
and people of color, as well as workforce training.
Portland Clean Energy Fund plans to give out 15,000 cooling units
PCEF has also launched a new Heat Response Program that plans to distribute between 12,000 and 15,000 portable heating and cooling pumps
over five years, with special priority placed on addressing heat hazards for seniors, low-income people and residents who are Black, Indigenous
or a person of color.
At least one to-be-determined nonprofit will serve as a procurement partner that buys the heat pumps, as PCEF says they are prohibited by city
code from purchasing the units directly and can only distribute funds to nonprofit organizations.
ADVERTISEMENT
✕
✕
✕
Next story in 5 ✕
Next story in 5
“This was core to the program design: that investments from the fund are implemented by qualified nonprofit organizations,” said Dabbs.
“Other than administration and capacity building, the city cannot access PCEF resources.”
The spokeswoman says the city created two separate requests for proposals, one for heat pump procurement and the other for community
distribution.
“We could have had the nonprofit community distribution partners acquire equipment on their own,” she said, “but we quickly teased out that
a centralized purchasing role made more sense.”
ADD AS PREFERRED SOURCE ON GOOGLE
Copyright 2026 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
SPONSORED CONTENT
Privacy Policy
Woman sells ring given by ex, then jeweler tells her 'This can't be true'
High Tally
Coast Guard Intercepts Strange Blue Boat. Then They Take A Look Inside!
Cleverst
Cher's Son Is Probably The Most Handsome Man To Ever Exist
Novelodge
This Simple Hack That Keeps Rodents Out Of Your Engine Bay
Vamoose
Ask a Pro: "Should I Convert my IRA to a Roth after age 60?"
SmartAsset
Warning 12 Products To Avoid Buying At Costco
Novelodge
Seniors Born 1939-1969 Receive 11 Benefits This Month If They Ask
Silver Penny
✕
Next story in 5
Remember Him Wait Till You See Him Now
Next story in 5
Daily Sport X
A small hearing aid that is transforming the lives of thousands of people
Hearing Magazine
Sleep Apnea? Try This Japanese Trick (It's Genius!)
derilamemoryfoam.com
1 Odd Trick Restores Your Eyes To Perfect 20/20 Vision
Hartford Review Journal Learn more
NYC Doctor Warns Seniors About the Ice Water Mistake They Make Every Morning
Hartford Review Journal Learn more
✕
Next story in 5
5 spring dresses that look good on everyone
Next story in 5
DRESSES & JUMPSUITS / 3 Hours Ago
Our team of experts has selected the best spring dresses out of hundreds of models. Donʼt buy a spring dress before reading these reviews.
8 adaptogenic beverages to try for Dry January
SUPPLEMENTS / 4 Hours Ago
Adaptogens are herbs, roots and other plant-based substances that help your body manage stress.
Hereʼs when to take down your Christmas tree, according …
✕
HOLIDAY / 1 Day Ago Next story in 5
Next story in 5
Not sure how much longer you should leave your tree up? Hereʼs what tradition says.
View All BestReviews
TOP STORIES
N Portland gastropub to shutter after 14 years
Caribbean flights canceled after US strikes
Venezuela 49ers host Seahawks in race for NFCʼs No. 1 seed
Man killed in shooting at Vancouver sports bar Trumpʼs Venezuela operation polarizes world
parking … leaders
Top Stories
MORE STORIES
N Portland gastropub to shutter after 14 years
Caribbean flights canceled after US strikes Venezuela
49ers host Seahawks in race for NFCʼs No. 1 seed
Man killed in shooting at Vancouver sports bar parking …
✕
Next story in 5
Next story in 5
Trumpʼs Venezuela operation polarizes world leaders
Driver killed in Beaverton crash after PPB pursuit
Democrats rip Trump admin for strikes on Venezuela
Trump: US will ʻbe involvedʼ in new Venezuela leadership
More Stories
KOIN.com Video
Washington man accused Warrant issued for Man indicted after 2 dead, 1 critically injured ʻDrop the gunʼ: Vancouver
of sexual assault,… Portland mom accused i… attempted kidnapping at… after shooting, stabbing … police release footage …
12 hours ago 12 hours ago 12 hours ago 13 hours ago 15 hours ago
More Videos
✕
Next story in 5
Next story in 5
Current Tonight Tomorrow
47° 46° 52°
Fair Rain Scattered Showers, Breezy
Precip: 80% Precip: 60%
TRENDING STORIES
1 First weekend of 2026: Rainy, windy at times for …
2 Man killed in shooting at Vancouver sports bar parking …
3 2 men dead, 1 injured in Newport stabbing, shooting
4 Driver killed in Beaverton crash after PPB pursuit
5 Group of men caught in King Tide on ʻvery smallʼ …
BESTREVIEWS.COM - TOP PICKS TO MAKE EVERYONE HAPPY
Hereʼs when to take down your Christmas tree, according …
Holiday•1 day ago
LEGO, Apple and more top Amazonʼs ʻhotʼ new releases …
Holiday•2 weeks ago
Last-minute stocking stuffers that will still get …
Holiday•2 weeks ago
Best last-minute holiday gifts that will still get …
Holiday•2 weeks ago
Amazonʼs first Super Saturday Sale has huge discounts …
Holiday•2 weeks ago
Walmartʼs ʻFlash Dealsʼ are filled with hidden gems …
Holiday•2 weeks ago
✕
Next story in 5
Next story in 5
View All BestReviews Picks
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
Loading survey...
Ad removed. Details
Reporting Portland and Vancouver area
breaking news and weather stories to
make Oregon and Southwest
Washington a better place to live
News Weather
Newsletters Video
AM Extra Sports
Everyday Northwest Community
✕
Next story in 5
Next story in 5
About Us
KOIN: FCC Public File KRCW: FCC Public File
Nexstar CC Certification Contact Us
Advertise with Us KOIN: FCC EEO Report 2024-2025
KRCW: FCC EEO Report 2024-2025
Get News App Get Weather App
Stay Connected
Privacy Policy 09/30/2025 Terms Of Use
FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact
Subscribe To Push Notifications The Hill
NewsNation BestReviews
Content Licensing Advertise with Nexstar
Journalistic Integrity Sitemap
Your Privacy Choices
© 1998 - 2026 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved.
✕
Next story in 5
Next story in 5