Independent. Member-supported. Independent.
donate now
For the Pacific Northwest. Member-supported.
About OPB Public media funding OPB and KMHD events OPB en Español Partnerships Newsletters
POLITICS
Multnomah County approves $2.8 billion
budget with funding for homeless services,
gun violence prevention
By Rebecca Ellis (OPB)
June 3, 2021 4:49 p.m.
While all five commissioners voted in favor of the budget, Commissioner
Sharon Meieran said she was unsatisfied with how the money for homeless
services was distributed.
The Multnomah County board of commissioners passed a $2.8 billion budget Thursday,
putting millions toward efforts to help the region’s houseless population, prevent gun
violence and mitigate the spread of COVID-19.
Commissioners say it’s the largest budget in county history thanks to new dollars from
the federal American Rescue Plan and three measures recently passed by voters that will
fund tuition-free preschool, an overhaul of the county library system and homeless
services.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Metro’s homeless services measure is anticipated to bring in $52 million for the county
to use over the next year. The county’s budget puts the money toward initiatives to help
people on the streets find housing and remain there with onsite job training, addiction
treatment, and mental health care. The budget also allocates funding for rent assistance,
street outreach, enhanced hygiene services and more shelter capacity.
“Thanks to the supportive housing services measure that passed over a year ago, we
finally have the capacity to make unprecedented investments in the solutions we know
end peoples’ homelessness,” said Kafoury at the budget vote.
All five commissioners voted in favor of the budget, though Commissioner Sharon
Meieran said she was unsatisfied with how the money for homeless services was
ultimately distributed.
Meieran said she wanted to see more county money going to support the six outdoor
shelter “safe rest villages” that Portland city commissioner Dan Ryan recently
announced would be built by the end of 2021. Ryan has said the city plans to use $20
million in federal coronavirus relief money for the shelter and Kafoury pledged her
support. The county plans to offer case management services at the six sites through the
city-county Joint Office of Homeless Services.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
But Meieran said she believed the county was not acting as a true partner in the project.
“I feel that rather than do our part to invest any new money and county money in this
partnership that we have said is so important … We’ve dedicated essentially no new
funding to support of the sites or to the behavioral health or case management that is
needed in those sites.”
Both Commissioner Meieran and Jessica Vega Pederson asked for changes to the budget
that would provide the board with more oversight over how the county was supporting
the homeless villages. Meieran requested the Joint Office appear by the end of
September to provide a report on how the city’s villages are being developed. Another
note by Meieran and Vega Pederson asked for a larger briefing by the end of the year on
whether there is new funding that could be used to support services at the six camps.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Meieran said she believed this additional funding should be going to the camps now -
but it was clear it wasn’t going to happen.
“Unfortunately I feel that every other person on this board has been convinced that we
should wait for future federal funds to make this happen,” she said.
The American Rescue Plan Act allocated $157 million to Multnomah County, which
must be spent by 2024. The county has just under $79 million to use in the next fiscal
year.
Approximately $60 million goes directly to mitigating the spread of COVID-19 with tens
of millions going toward contact tracing, case investigation, testing and vaccination.
Some of the money will also be spent on mitigating some of the cascading effects of the
pandemic, including a rise in gun violence and an uptick in evictions.
The proposed budget puts $816,000 toward providing a legal defense for tenants in
eviction proceedings. This would fund positions for two attorneys and a paralegal. The
budget also puts new money towards slowing the dramatic uptick in gun violence the
region has seen in the past year, including expanding the Gun Violence Behavioral
Health Response Team, which “will provide mental health consultants and peers to work
with gun- and gang-impacted youth and families,” according to budget documents.
“These investments also include efforts that take a public health approach to violence
focusing on root cause community strengths and partnerships as well as recognizing the
role of systemic racism in who violence impacts the most,” said Kafoury.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
📨
Daily news in your
inbox
example@domain.com Sign up
Sign up today for OPB’s “First Look” – your
daily guide to the most important news
and culture stories from around the
Northwest.
Related Stories
Portland commissioner announces plans for 6 homeless villages
Ryan said $20 million in federal coronavirus relief dollars would be used to set up six outdoor sites and
provide basic hygiene and support services: laundry, showers, handwashing stations, portable toilets
and food. The city-county Joint Office of Homeless Services will provide case management for people
within the villages.
June 2, 2021
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland illegally discarding personal property during homeless
sweeps, class-action suit alleges
A group of houseless individuals have joined a class-action lawsuit filed against the city of Portland
Monday, alleging contractors have been illegally discarding people’s personal belongings while
dispersing homeless encampments.
May 24, 2021
Tags: Politics
Federal funding for public media has been eliminated.
Take action now and protect OPB's independent
journalism and essential programs for everyone.
Make a Sustaining contribution now

About OPB Manage My Membership
STREAMING NOW
Help LCiveen tWeirre! Sponsorship
Work With Us Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
FCC Public Files
FCC Applications
Terms of Use
Editorial Policy
SMS T&C
Contest Rules
Accessibility
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!