Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 26, 2021 at 3:53 pm
UPDATED: Mayor Wheeler Pepper Sprays a
Member of the Public During a Confrontation
ALEX ZIELINSKI
1598319742-1595519500-screen_shot_2020-07-23_at_8.51.07_am.png
MATHIEU LEWIS-ROLLAND
Update, Jan. 26: The Portland Police Bureau (PPB) has identified the target
of Mayor Ted Wheeler's pepper spray as Cary Cadonau, a local real estate
lawyer and heir to the Alpenrose Dairy company. In a police report made
public this afternoon, and first reported on by the Oregonian, PPB officer
Matt Miller said he called Cadonau Monday afternoon.
"Mr. Cadonau told me he was an 'attorney' and was hesitant to discuss the
matter with me," writes Miller. "He did say that he believed the Mayor
should be held 'accountable' and that he'd captured the entire incident on
video. When asked about what the mayor should be held accountable for
Mr. Cadonau declined to expound further."
Miller also asked Cadonau why he allegedly tried to obtain the receipt from
Wheeler's McMenamin's meal.
"Mr. Cadonau said he wanted the receipt because it would show how much
alcohol the mayor consumed that evening," Miller wrote. Cadonau refused
to hand the video he took of the encounter over to PPB.
Cadonau works as an attorney for the law firm Brownstein Rask. His bio on
the firm's website reads: "Cary enjoys working to achieve creative
resolutions to disputes while providing exceptional services."
Original Story, Jan. 24:
Mayor Ted Wheeler used pepper spray on a member of the public who
confronted him while out to dinner Sunday evening.
According to a police report, Wheeler was leaving the Hillsdale
McMenamins with former mayor Sam Adams—the latest hire to Wheeler's
team—when he was allegedly confronted by a middle-aged white man.
In the report given to a Portland Police Bureau (PPB) officer, Wheeler
described being stopped by the unfamiliar man after leaving the restaurant
around 8 pm. Wheeler said the man was filming him and accused him of
violating COVID-19 restrictions by taking his mask off while seated at an
outdoor tented restaurant table.
"I informed him the current Covid regulations allow people to take their
mask off for the purpose of eating and drinking," Wheeler said, per the
police report. "He then accused me of other things to which I indicated he
did not understand the rules and should probably have a better
understanding if he was going to confront people about them."
According to Wheeler, the man followed him to his car and continued to
film him, standing about two feet away from Wheeler and not wearing a
mask.
I'll let Wheeler explain what happened next:
"I clearly informed him that he needed to back off. He did not do so I
informed him that I was carrying pepper spray and that I would use it
if he did not back off. He remained at close distance, I pulled out my
pepper spray and I sprayed him in the eyes. He seemed surprised, and
backed off. He made a comment like 'I can't believe you just pepper
sprayed me.' He walked away from my car, the individual with me
suggested that I leave for my safety, before I did so I threw a full water
bottle towards him so that he could wash out his eyes with water."
Wheeler contacted PPB after leaving the scene. According to PPB, no
suspect has been identified in this case.
Adams was also interviewed by a PPB officer about the incident, as he
witnessed the entire event. According to the police report, Adams recorded
audio of the confrontation on his phone, which will be submitted as
evidence.
When asked by the Mercury about this incident during a press call Monday
morning, Wheeler declined to comment.
"I filed a police report," Wheeler said. "And that’s all I can tell you right now.”
Tim Becker, a spokesperson for Wheeler, essentially said the same in an
email to the Mercury this afternoon.
"Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler filed a police report relating to an incident
that occurred Sunday evening," wrote Becker. "The Mayor is cooperating
with the police investigation and encourages others involved to do the
same."
Wheeler is no stranger to being confronted in public by his critics. Earlier
this month, several people approached Wheeler while he was dining
outside a Northwest Portland cafe, and one person allegedly "swatted" the
mayor with their hand. According to PPB, that incident is still under
investigation.
Wheeler referenced this encounter in his police report, telling the officer
that he was "imminently concerned" for his personal safety, "as I had
recently been physically accosted in a similar situation."
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 6     ✉
TAGS: NEWS CITY HALL
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Federal Judge Grants Restraining Order Blocking Trump From Deploying Troops to
Portland
Oregon's Dismantling of Longstanding Houseless Encampment Highlights Broader
Problems
Portland City Attorney to US DOJ: “Please Do Not Fail America”
City Leaders Say Trump Administration Has Sent Influx of Federal Agents to Portland
Supporters Pack Courtroom for Portlander Facing Federal Protest Charges
With a Tenuous Ceasefire in Gaza, Portland Councilors Pledge to Investigate the City's
Links to Israel
Editors' Picks
It's the Mercury's 2024 Primary Election Night Live Blog!
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About Portland's Biggest Buildings, Biggest Liars, and
Biggest Waste of Money (Hint: It's the Cops)
City Council Approves Unfunded Plan to Criminalize Unsheltered Homelessness
Commissioning Change
The Biggest Portland Environmental News of 2023
THE TRASH REPORT: Fascists are Babies, Celebrities are Silly, Rich People are Horrible
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286