Home / Planning and Sustainability (BPS) / Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) / News
Applications Open: High Road Advisory Council (HRAC)
PCEF is seeking community and industry leaders to help shape a more inclusive clean-energy workforce
in Portland. If you have experience in trades, contracting, or climate-related work, we invite you to
apply. The application period is open now through Jan. 23, 2026.
Learn more and apply
Portland City Council votes to appoint first five members of the
Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund Committee
Press Release
Inaugural members bring a wealth of experience in renewable
energy, business and workforce development, urban food
production and community outreach to meet the needs of
communities of color and low-income households through climate
action.
Published: September 25, 2019 4:45 pm
Contact:
Eden Dabbs
L: 503-823-9908 / C: 503-260-3301
eden.dabbs@portlandoregon.gov
Damon Motz-Storey (PCEF community coalition comment)
C: 303-913-5634
damon@oregonpsr.org
Portland, ORE. — Portland City Council made history today by appointing
the first five members of the Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits
Fund Committee. These inaugural members will nominate the remaining
four members of the nine-member committee, which is charged with
reviewing proposals and selecting grant recipients for clean energy projects
that will benefit communities of color and low-income households.
Stated Mayor Ted Wheeler, “The Portland Clean Energy Fund is a nationally
acclaimed model for climate action and I am excited to have such a
dynamic and talented slate of appointments on the PCEF committee to help
ensure we get it right. This is an important milestone toward ensuring that
all Portlanders, especially working families, have access to a green future
with clean energy jobs.”
“We have such a committed and talented group of people joining the PCEF
committee,” said Commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty. “I’m excited to see what
comes next as we continue building a program that is the first of its kind in
the nation, thanks to the community’s efforts.”
And Khanh Pham, Organizing Director at OPAL Environmental Justice
Oregon and a leader in the PCEF community coalition, said, "We are thrilled
to welcome these initial five Portlanders who have the expertise to lead the
program to a successful launch. As the measure states, these individuals
have a great depth and breadth of skills, are committed to the goals of the
City's Climate Action Plan, and represent our racial and geographic diversity.
We are so excited to support them as they start setting up the PCEF grant
program and filling the final four spots on the committee."
ABOUT THE APPOINTEES
Each of the five Commissioners selected one nominee.
Maria Gabrielle Sipin, Mayor Wheeler’s choice, is a professional
transportation planner and community health advocate whose work
emphasizes the importance of investing in bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
infrastructure and addressing displacement, safety, and accessibility for
communities of color. She has experience working with people
experiencing homelessness and LGBTQ youth in health care settings and
continues to push for mobility justice and participatory budgeting through
her grassroots nonprofit involvement.
Commissioner Amanda Fritz nominated Dr. Megan Horst, an Assistant
Professor in the school of Urban Studies & Planning at Portland State
University. She possesses substantial urban agriculture and local food
systems expertise that is recognized both locally and nationally. Ms. Horst
also brings a strong equity lens and experience in food justice work.
Michael Edden David Hill is a journeyman electrician who, in addition to
experience in wind power design and deployment, also has expertise in
construction management on one of the largest solar photo voltaic systems
in the country. Mr. Hill, who was Commissioner Nick Fish’s choice, has a
solid understanding of informal support ecosystems necessary to support
paths through pre/apprenticeship programs.
Commissioner Hardesty nominated Shanice Brittany Clarke, the Director
of Community Engagement at Portland Public Schools. Ms. Clarke offers
deep community engagement experience, having worked directly with 75-
100 community organizations annually that serve Portland’s diverse
communities. In addition, Ms. Clark is a national delegate on the Climate
Justice Alliance and is also a proud member of the Sunrise Movement,
supporting their 4-year plan to make climate action an urgent priority in
every corner of our home.
And Robin Wang, a seasoned business, nonprofit, and community leader
with a passion for deploying capital and harnessing business to benefit the
greater good, was nominated by Commissioner Chloe Eudaly. As a former
owner of a sustainable lifestyle business, Mr. Wang brings a wealth of
expertise in both sustainability and small business operation. Mr. Wang is
the executive director of a local community development financial
institution that supports underbanked entrepreneurs and serves on
Prosper Portland’s Council for Economic and Racial Equity.
These five appointments will run for four years, ending on September 25,
2023. Now that they have been confirmed, they will work to recommend
four additional appointments for two-year terms.
About the Clean Energy Fund
The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits initiative was passed by
65% of voters in November 2018. It will provide a consistent, long-term
funding source and oversight structure to ensure that the City of Portland’s
Climate Action Plan is implemented in a manner that supports social,
economic and environmental benefits for all Portlanders, particularly
communities of color and low-income residents. The initiative was
supported by a broad coalition of groups and individuals and represents
the first environmental initiative in Oregon led by communities of color.
PCEF is anticipated to bring $54 – $71 million annually in new revenue for
living wage jobs, sustainable agriculture, green infrastructure, and
residential/commercial renewable and efficiency projects in the Portland
area, including the development of a diverse and well-trained workforce
and contractor pool in the field of clean energy. Bringing together a diverse
grant committee is the first of several milestones involving community
members to prepare for PCEF’s first grant cycle anticipated to begin in
Spring 2020.