Donate Newsletters
Home » Climate + Energy » Clean Energy Jobs Bill: What Oregonians Need to Know
Climate + Energy Economy + Jobs Cap-and-invest Cap-and-Trade Clean Energy Jobs Bill
Clean Energy Jobs Bill: What
Oregonians Need to Know
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Wertheimer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Donate
Biglow Canyon Wind Farm, Oregon.
Kristin Eberhard
March 21, 2019
Share:
Oregonians have been pushing for comprehensive climate action for more than a decade.
Other states and provinces in North America have forged ahead, attracting clean energy
investments, creating local jobs, and cleaning up the air they breathe but Oregonians are
still paying price for someone elseʼs pollution—hospital bills for our kidsʼ asthma, a
faltering seafood industry, wildfires, and more.
With not a moment to spare, Oregonʼs elected leaders are united in making carbon pricing
legislation a priority for this session. A joint committee spent most of last year holding
hearings and drafting a cap-and-invest bill to limit pollution and put proceeds toward clean
energy and jobs. House Bill 2020 has seen several public hearings so far this session and
legislators are currently working on amendments. Weʼll update our analysis once those
amendments are released.
Hereʼs how the current bill stacks up against Sightlineʼs three big policy questions for any
carbon pricing proposal.
1. The cap will be pretty good, but not quite strict enough.
2. Much of the revenue, sadly, will go for free to utilities and industrial facilities, as well
as to the Highway Trust Fund.
3. The bill still gets a lot of design details right but includes a few worrying aspects.
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
How strict will theW cearpt hbeei?mer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
The cap limits how much pollution large polluters can release into the air each year from
2021 through 2050. For the program to be effective at curbing pollution, the cap must
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
decline quickly enough so that pollution goes down faster, and also covers most of the
you.
pollutants and polluters in the state.
Donate
As it stands, Oregonʼs cap is pretty darn good… but could be better. Maybe the
amendments, expected any day now, will tighten it.
Oregonʼs cap doesnʼt go down far or fast enough
On the upside: Oregon leaders briefly flirted with the idea of eliminating a 2035 goal so the
cap would decline more slowly but they ultimately kept both a 2035 goal (cut pollution to
at least 45 percent below 1990 levels) and a 2050 goal (slash pollution to at least 80 percent
below 1990 levels).
This is a respectable rate of decline and if Oregon had enacted an enforceable limit on
pollution ten years ago, it might have been a sufficient contribution toward stabilizing the
climate. But unfortunately, each passing year adds more pollution to the atmosphere,
which brings us to the downside: The next decade is critical to climate stability. As
environmental justice advocates in Oregon have pointed out, a stricter cap—a 2025 goal of
25 percent cuts, a 2035 goal of 55 percent cuts, and a 2050 goal of net zero pollution, for
example—would put Oregon more in line with where scientists say we need to be.
International scientists now recommend cutting pollution 45 percent below 2010 levels by
2030, and to net zero emissions by 2050.
Oregon Clean Energy Jobs Bill 2019
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Wertheimer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Original Sightline DInostnituattee graphic, available under our free use policy.
Oregonʼs cap covers all major pollutants
Although advocates sometimes talk about limiting “carbon,” a well-designed program
needs to cover more than just carbon dioxide. Happily, Oregonʼs cap covers all seven major
pollutants: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3).
Oregonʼs cap covers major polluters
Oregonʼs cap would also cover most polluters, including electricity, natural gas,
transportation, and large industrial sources. Together, these add up to about 85 percent of
all climate pollution in the state. The cap does not cover waste disposal sites, agricultural
sources, airplanes, boats, railroads, and it exempts cogeneration facilities (plants that
produce both electricity and heat) operated by a public university or the state.
What would revenue be used for?
A cap-and-invest program uses permits to enforce limits on pollution. A permit, also called
an allowance, lets the holder emit one ton of pollution. The number of allowances created
is equal to the cap (if the cap is set at 100 tons annually, there are 100 allowances available
per year). Polluters must submit an allowance for every ton they pollute or face steep
monetary penalties. The state can choose to auction off the allowances, which sets a
market price for pollution and generates revenue. The state may also choose to give the
allowances to polluters for free, in which case the polluters get the full value of the
allowance and the state gets no revenue.
Oregonʼs current bill chooses to give a lot of allowances away for free, and almost all of
what remains gets siphoned into the Highway Trust Fund. Hopefully, the amendments will
give less away to polluters and keep more for investing in Oregon.
Unfortunately, Oregonʼs bill gives lots of free handouts.
The Oregon bill would give electric utilities all their allowances for free through 2030, and
natural gas utilities might get the same. Certain industrial plants would get all their
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
allowances free in the first year. This could have two negative outcomes: first, there isnʼt
Wertheimer for supporting a
any revenue coming in from these sectors to invest in clean energy and jobs. Second, it
could undermine the market sanuds letaadi tno adibstolerte Cd aprsiccesa.dia.
The Oregon bill could avoid the pitfalls of totally free allowances by taking the minimal step
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
of forcing utilities to buy some of their allowances in a consignment auction. Other
you.
programs have given utilities all or most of their allowances for free, but then forced them
Donate
to sell and buy back those allowances in a “consignment” auction—meaning the
allowances belong to the utilities, but they temporarily consign them to auction and then
buy them back. Experience shows that even a small “consignment” auction can ensure a
more accurate price. Giving utilities their allowances for free lets them ignore their
pollution, but forcing them to bid in a consignment auction compels them to grapple with
the question of how much they would be willing to pay for allowances. In other words, it
forces them to take the cost of pollution seriously.
Some important investments
After all those free allowances, there might be precious little revenue from the program
(outside the Highway Trust Fund, which is explained below), especially in the early years.
Weʼre talking less than $80 million per year for the whole state. Thatʼs on the same order of
magnitude as what the city of Portland alone will raise for investments from its Clean
Energy Fund. The meager revenue that remains for the state will go into the Climate
Investments Fund to support important things like energy efficiency, renewable energy,
land use planning, natural and working lands, reducing air pollution, and improving the
resiliency of Oregonʼs fish and wildlife ecosystems.
Within the Climate Investments Fund, 10 percent of the money must benefit Indian Tribes,
and a yet-to-be-determined portion must go to the Just Transition Fund to support job
creation, job training, and support for workers adversely affected by climate change or
climate change policies.
And the Highway Trust Fund
The transportation sector is the biggest source of pollution and therefore the biggest
source of revenue in Oregon. At the start, sellers of dirty transportation fuels will
collectively pay around $400 million per year for allowances and the amount will increase
as the cap tightens, allowances become scarcer, and their price goes up. However, the
stateʼs Constitution puts limits on how the state can use that money. Namely, it must spend
it on “the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation and
use of public highways, roads, streets and roadside rest areas.” The bill creates a
Transportation Decarbonization Investments Account within the Highway Trust Fund in an
attempt to put the money toward purposes that both meet constitutional requirements
and also help with the stateʼs climate goals.
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Hereʼs the thing: there are oodWlees orft ghreeati moppeorrt ufonitrie ss ufopr ap trouer tTrianngsp oartation
Decarbonization Investment Account. To name a few:
sustainable Cascadia.
Enhancing operations so that more people can conveniently use transit to get
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
where they need to go
you.
Investing in safe streets so that people who walk or bike can choose to do so
withouDto fneaatre
Investing in charging infrastructure for electric vehicles, especially for fleets that
serve many people rather than private vehicles that serve just one owner
But the current restrictions will cut out many of those important investments.
To make the most of the Oregon Clean Energy Jobs Bill, Oregon needs to revise its
Constitution to allow investments in clean transportation options.
Short of that, Oregon could use the transportation sector money to create a “Climate
Kicker,” instead of letting all the money bleed into new mega-highway projects. By
refunding all of the transportation money back to drivers in the form of a “Climate Kicker,”
Oregon could give a financial bump to Oregon drivers. And it could avoid digging the
climate hole deeper by providing funding that might encourage driving by widening
highways.
Does the policy get the design details right?
The devil is in the details. Oregonʼs bill gets a lot of design details right but includes a few
worrying aspects. In particular, Oregon does not appear to have learned from other
programʼs experience and set up a way to deal with oversupply. But it has set a hard price
floor, which ensures polluters will pay at least that amount for allowances.
Adjusting the cap in case of oversupply
Other pollution caps—including the northeastern statesʼ RGGI program, the European
Unionʼs, and Californiaʼs—all set the bar too low at the outset or found their pollution limits
were too high as the program went on. In other words, polluters were able to reduce
pollution more quickly than expected, so the cap no longer kept the pressure on to
continue cutting. Oregon should learn from the programs that came before it and include a
mechanism for adjusting the cap. One simple mechanism would be to track the number of
unused allowances, and, if the pool of unused allowances gets too high, automatically
divert allowances from the program into a price reserve. That price reserve could then be
used to create a softer price ceiling that doesnʼt violate the cap (see below).
Banking and borrowing
The Oregon bill gets this right, encouraging early action because every year counts when it
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
comes to stabilizing the planet. It allows banking but not borrowing. This encourages
Wertheimer for supporting a
polluters to:
sustainable Cascadia.
Cut emissions as soon as possible because they can always bank extra allowances
for a future date
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
Not to procrastinate because they canʼt borrow against hoped-for future reductions
you.
to make up for polluting more today.
Donate
However, banking needs to be paired with a mechanism to adjust the cap, as described
above, in case too many allowances go into the bank.
Price floor, ceiling, and reserve
As we at Sightline have said before, a carbon tax gives certainty about the price but leaves
questions about how much it can reduce pollution. A cap gives certainty about pollution
reduction but also leaves room for price volatility. Oregonʼs bill sets a hard floor that prices
canʼt dip below (and guarantees that itʼll get more expensive for polluters) and sets a
ceiling that triggers unlimited allowances to bring prices back down.
Unfortunately, that hard price ceiling is like a get-out-of-jail-free card. It flouts the whole
idea of putting a hard limit on pollution, which is the entire point of the cap. Other
programs have used a soft price ceiling that releases allowances from a reserve pot to
moderate the price without breaking the cap.
Linkage
Oregon is a relatively small market. It would benefit from joining the broader North
American market through more market flexibility, less market volatility, and lower
administrative costs. The bill seems set up to link, but its cap doesnʼt exactly track
Californiaʼs goal of 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030. It might run into problems
convincing California and Quebec that its cap is as strict as theirs and therefore qualified to
link. It would be a disappointment for the Beaver State to come this far just to go it alone.
Offsets
Offsets are pollution reductions outside the cap that a capped entity can purchase and use
in place of an allowance. For example, an industrial facility that is covered by the cap could
purchase an offset that funds reductions in emissions from agricultural operations that
arenʼt covered by the cap. Advocates for offsets argue that they can spur innovation and
reductions in sectors that are harder to regulate, such as forestry. Opponents of offsets
worry that they let polluters off the hook, and in particular that they allow polluters to keep
spewing into already-bad air quality areas while purchasing offsets elsewhere. Oregonʼs bill
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
attempts to strike a balance, by limiting offsets to no more than 8 percent of an entityʼs
compliance obligations (like CWalieforrntiha eanidm Qeuerb efco dro )s aundp aplsoo raltloinwigng a additional
restrictions on offsets in bad asiru qsutaalitiyn aarebasl.e Cascadia.
Oregonʼs Chance to Act
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Ten American states and three Canadian provinces are already leading the way with their
Donate
own successful pollution pricing programs, which are attracting clean energy investments,
creating local jobs, and cleaning up the air they breathe. Meanwhile, Oregonians are still
paying the prices of someone elseʼs pollution through hospital bills for our kidsʼ asthma, a
faltering seafood industry, wildfires, and more. In the face of a deafening lack of climate
action at the federal level, Oregon can join the burgeoning ranks of climate realists and
chart a healthier, safer path forward by finalizing the 2019 Clean Energy Jobs Bill. Oregon
legislators have until the end of June to pass this bill into law.
Climate + Energy, Economy + Jobs
Cap-and-invest, Cap-and-Trade, Clean Energy Jobs Bill
Tacoma Adopts Exemplary Reform for In-Law Apartments
Oregon Legislature Considers Pesticide Reform Bills
Share:
Talk to the Author
Kristin Eberhard
Kristin Eberhard is a fellow with Sightline Institute and Senior
Director of State & Local Policy for Rewiring America, following work
as Director of Climate Policy at the Niskanen Center.
About Sightline
Sightline Institute is an independent, nonpartisan, nonprofit think tank providing
leading original analysis of democracy, forests, energy, and housing policy in the
Pacific Northwest, Alaska, British Columbia, and beyond.
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Wertheimer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Donate
Climate + Energy
Transitioning off coal, oil, and gas to a future of abundant clean energy.
Learn More
Subscribe to our newsletters
Hear directly from our experts. Sign up for the Climate + Energy newsletter.
Subscribe
Prefer to listen to Sightline articles?
Listen to Sightline articles by subscribing to our feed on Spotify, Apple, or YouTube.
Find our Feeds
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Wertheimer for supporting a
More Climate + Energy research
sustainable Cascadia.
How the 2026 Washington Legislature Can Right-Size the Power Grid
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
The High CostD oofn aStleow Permitting
How Cascadia Can Maintain Its Heat Pump Momentum
Who Owns a Utility Matters Less for Climate Than the Rules They Play By
“If One Path Is Blocked, Nature Will Find Another”
Make a donation
Sightline's work is made possible by the generosity of people like you.
Donate
For press inquiries and interview requests, please contact
Martina Pansze.
Sightline Institute is a 501(c)3 non-profit organization and does not support, endorse, or
oppose any candidate or political party.
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
See an error? Have a quWesteiornt?heimer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
Find the author's contact information on our staff page to reach out to them, or send a
message to editor@sightline.org.
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Donate
Nonpartisan, nonprofit research and analysis to support strong communities, a green economy,
and a healthy environment.
Facebook
Bluesky
X
Instagram
LinkedIn
Contact Us
Subscribe to our newsletters
Our Work
Climate + Energy Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Democracy + Elections Wertheimer for supporting a
Housing + Cities sustainable Cascadia.
Press
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Press Releases
Donate
News Coverage
Our Impact
Funding + Financials
Ways to Support Us
About Us
Our People
Careers
Contact Us
Ⓒ
2026 Sightline Institute • All Rights Reserved
Site Policies
Thanks to Paul Beaudet & David
Wertheimer for supporting a
sustainable Cascadia.
Our work is made possible by the generosity of people like
you.
Donate