42% Off
$29.99 $45.00 $50.00 $55.00
LOCAL NEWS
'I just want to see things turn
around': Hundreds of volunteers
clean up downtown Portland
Hundreds of volunteers, including Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler, signed
up to clean up downtown on Thursday morning.
Credit: Bryant Clerkley
Author: Bryant Clerkley
Published: 11:58 AM PDT September 3, 2020
Updated: 12:01 PM PDT September 3, 2020
PORTLAND, Ore. — Hundreds of people signed up to clean up downtown Portland on
Thursday morning.
People remained socially distant as they lined up at the Benson Hotel. A volunteer named Kim
said she just want to get some normalcy back into the city.
"I love Portland," Kim said. "I just want to see things turn around. I support BLM and I support
justice. This is a beautiful city and I want to see it continue."
Sponsored Links
The best-selling hearing aid on Amazon is back
on promotion
Hearing Magazine
AAdd 11 ooff 11
Credit: Bryant Clerkley
Organizers said more than 400 people registered to clean up various areas of downtown. The
nonprofit SOLVE put the event together.
IN OTHER NEWS
Man accused of trying to m
child at Metzger Park to pa
for sex
Obesity expert: The cause of a big
belly is not excessive calories, b…
Health Insight
"We are just trying to bring Portlanders together and show that Portland is a vibrant, safe,
community," said SOLVE CEO Kris Karico.
Mayor Ted Wheeler took time out of his day to help clean.
When asked about recent violence downtown and having to move out of his condo in
Portland's Pearl District, Wheeler said, "To have the kind of violence and destruction we saw the
other night, clearly my presence is a hazard to other people in the community, so I need to find
another arrangement and that's what I'm seeking to do."
Credit: Bryant Clerkley
Wheeler went on to say that he supports the presence of the Oregon State Police in the city.
They have been deputized by the federal government to help Portland police with the nightly
protests.
"They have been a critical partner to use to make sure we do have the resources we need, so
we won't need to rely on federal resources coming into the community and creating the
escalation we saw several weeks ago," Wheeler said.
RELATED: 'President Trump needs to wake up': Wheeler, other mayors respond to threat to
defund cities
RELATED: 'Deafening silence': Former Portland police chief condemns inaction from city
council on nightly violence
Prada Butterfly Sunglasses, 53mm
Prada Butterfly Sunglasses, 53mm
Bloomingdale's|Sponsored Shop now
Warning 12 Products To Avoid Buying At Costco
Novelodge|Sponsored
Coast Guard Intercepts Strange Blue Boat. Then They Take A Look Inside!
Cleverst|Sponsored
This device changes the lives of seniors with hearing loss (without breaking
the bank)
Hearing Magazine|Sponsored
We compared over 24 dash cams for 2026. We found the best, so you don't
have to.
Expert Product Reviews|Sponsored
The best-selling hearing aid on Amazon is back on promotion
Hearing Magazine|Sponsored
Never Put Eggs In The Refrigerator. Here's Why...
Car Novels|Sponsored
Judge orders ICE detainee released on the spot after learning he was arrested without
a warrant
KGW
How did Victoria Jones die? What we know about the death of Tommy Lee Jones'
daughter
KGW
-30% -25%
BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...