Family Sharing is here! Subscribe to Premium Access for $5
OPINION
Opinion: Portland Clean Energy Fund built on
accountability, transparency and responsibility
Published: Apr. 03, 2022, 6:15 a.m.
A contractor works on insulating a home. The Portland Clean Energy Fund has issued grants for weatherizing homes and
other projects assisting communities of color and low-income Portlanders.
By Guest Columnist | The Oregonian
Carmen Rubio and Sam Baraso
Rubio, a Portland city commissioner, oversees the Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability that houses the Portland Clean Energy Fund. Baraso is
program manager for the Portland Clean Energy Fund.
00::0000 // 00::4422
Portlanders are rightly proud of our history of bold climate leadership. Yet
we have seen this great work benefit mostly white and upper-income
Portlanders for generations.
The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund, or PCEF as itʼs
commonly known, was designed to close this disparity: to build climate
resilience, support lower-income Portlanders and Portlanders of color, and
dismantle inequitable systems rooted in our regionʼs history of white
supremacy. We do this in part by combating the insidious and false
narrative that many people of color are familiar with: that when it comes to
large sums of money – whether grants, bonds, loans or other investments –
we lack the capability or experience to manage it responsibly.
Advertisement
As the first-of-its-kind program in the nation, Portlanders should be proud
of this program. In true Portland fashion, it was born of grassroots political
action—designed, implemented and governed by the frontline communities
impacted first and most significantly by climate change. And Portlanders
overwhelmingly approved it.
We take this responsibility seriously and respect it for the unprecedented
opportunity that it is and continues to be.
And weʼve already seen some of those opportunities come to fruition. The
inaugural grants we awarded last year funded projects that retrofitted
homes, improved efficiency in affordable housing projects, purchased
ductless heat pumps for low-income homes and apartments, planted
numerous trees, and replaced pavement with native vegetation in East and
Southeast Portland.
Now, as we move into our next phase, we share a common goal with our
critics: to continuously improve the program so it functions with
unparalleled accountability, responsibility and transparency while achieving
our critically important mission. Weʼre creating a blueprint for the rest of the
world to follow, and we want to do it right.
Advertisement
Regardless of our comfort as trailblazers in combating climate change,
weʼre still gathering feedback and learning, much like other start-up
enterprises aimed at making positive change. An audit released last month
by the city auditor laid out some of the ways we can improve. And as a
start-up enterprise, we seek the same opportunity afforded to these other
young programs: the chance to innovate, make mistakes, to learn and
deliver successes.
Important changes are already underway and have been since January. We
started by adopting additional safeguards in the grant guidelines and
proposal review processes for all applicants. We broadened and lengthened
our professional background and reference reviews on applicant
organizations and their key staff, and defined parameters to appropriately
determine grant sizes and scope. These changes help to strengthen our
fiduciary oversight while also responsibly allowing organizations to develop
positive track records and scale their growth.
Itʼs important to correct a common misunderstanding about our program
and the auditʼs findings: we already specify performance metrics in every
contract. The audit recommended establishing program performance goals.
We agree with this finding and have been working to establish these goals
for some time. Well before the audit, we began engaging with stakeholders
to ensure all our metrics are both appropriate and robust. We will continue
to refine existing metrics this summer and create a user-friendly digital
dashboard for anyone to view how these investments directly impact our
community members who have been cast aside for far too long.
Advertisement
We are closing disparities for frontline communities by centering their
voices, validating leadership that exists within Black, Indigenous, Latinx and
other communities of color and thus ensuring that this time, our
communities are not left behind but are in fact self-determining their
futures.
To those who have suggested we stop funding projects until weʼve
implemented all of the auditorʼs recommendations - we strongly disagree.
We can both immediately invest in climate resiliency and carefully develop a
responsive, accountable program. These are not mutually exclusive goals.
Portlanders need the projects that PCEF funds and they need them now.
Climate change is not stopping, or even slowing—nor should our work. Our
opportunity to build resilience is fast closing.
We have an ethical question before us: Do we keep our promise to voters—
to rise and meet the challenges of climate change—but this time by
centering our low-income communities and our people of color as
decisionmakers? Or do we maintain the status quo that got us here? The
answer is clear to us.
Advertisement
About Us
Our Journalists
About OregonLive.com
Contact The Newsroom
Technical Support
Advertise With Us
Subscribe to The Oregonian
Subscriber Services
Digital Subscription FAQ
Delivery Opportunities
Accessibility Statement
Subscriptions
The Oregonian
eNewspaper
Email Newsletters
Already a Subscriber
Manage your Subscription
Place a Vacation Hold
Make a Payment
Delivery Feedback
Read More Top News
Today's Top News
Politics
Crime
Business
Commuting
Weather
Education
Homes & Gardens
Letters to the Editor
Video
Environment
Here is Oregon
Noticias en español
Special Sections
Sports
High School Sports
Ducks
Beavers
Trail Blazers
Timbers
Thorns
Recruiting News
Entertainment
Travel
TV & Movies
Eat, Drink, Cook
Comics
Your Regional News Pages
Portland
Washington County
Clackamas County
Clark County
Pacific Northwest
Follow Us
Email Newsletters
YouTube
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
RSS
Mobile
iPhone, Android apps
Tablet apps
More on OregonLive.com
Place an Ad
Autos
Jobs
Sponsor Content
Post a Job
Newspapers.com Archive
Your Privacy Rights Your Privacy Choices Privacy Policy | User Agreement | Ad Choices
Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement,
(updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights
(updated 1/1/2026).
© 2026 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used,
except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.
Ad Choices