TTaaxx,, TTrraannssppoorrttaattiioonn FFeeee HHiikkeess iinn JJaannuuaa
Family Sharing is here! Subscribe to Premium Access for $5
POLITICS
Portland watchdog softened critical audit of
clean energy program after its leaders
complained of misunderstandings, racist lens
Updated: Mar. 25, 2022, 12:21 p.m.|Published: Mar. 23, 2022, 6:15 a.m.
Brooke Herbert/The Oregonian/OregonLive
128 shares
By Shane Dixon Kavanaugh | The Oregonian/OregonLive
Portland’s elected city government watchdog substantially softened what
had been a highly critical audit of the city’s new voter-enacted clean energy
fund after program officials blasted the initial findings as short sighted and
salted with racist undertones.
A nine-month review by the Portland Auditor’s Office determined that the
cash-rich program was “in danger of falling short of its mission” because it
had not created performance, accountability and equity targets and
measurement systems, records reviewed by The Oregonian/OregonLive
show.
Advertisement
Play War Thunder now for free
War Thunder|Sponsored Play Now
City auditors last summer went so far as to recommend that the program
cease distributing any more tax money to nonprofit groups until it put those
systems in place. The fund would just months later earn negative headlines
when it awarded more than $11 million to a nonprofit whose leader had
spent years in prison for defrauding energy companies.
The auditor’s initial findings elicited fierce pushback from clean energy
officials, who believed auditors had unfairly held the emerging program to a
standard fit for a fully operational one. Doing so in the final audit would
ultimately damage the program intended primarily to help the city’s
communities of color, insisted its manager, Sam Baraso.
In keeping with that mission, most of the program’s employees and nearly
all members of the volunteer committee that recommends grantees are
people of color.
“(Baraso) said that in the worst light the audit would be seen as blatantly
racist and in the best light as negligent and would cause harm,” notes taken
by a member of the audit team during a tense meeting last June show. “He
considered the audit ‘a big miss.’”
Advertisement
85% off 55% off
$23.24 $53.98
Earlier this month, Auditor Mary Hull Caballero and her team finally issued
their official audit — with a dramatically different tone than the original
draft and without the key recommendation to pause funding in the absence
of performance metrics. That was true even though auditors did not find
changes in the underlying facts about what voters were promised and what
the program has so far delivered.
Overseers of the clean energy program now say the program will continue
to issue as much as $100 million in grants this year before it commits to
voter-required climate goals by December and performance metrics by July
2023.
The Oregonian/OregonLive requested access to all audit records under the
state public records law, after its reporting based on City Hall public
calendars revealed the agency delayed release of the audit for a notably
long period of time after presenting its initial findings to program leaders.
Government auditors almost always consult with the agencies they audit
before releasing their official findings, and it’s normal for the program or
department they’ve audited to push back against some critiques. Many of
those objections would then be noted in the published audit, typically in a
written response from leaders of the program subjected to it.
Advertisement
80% off 50% off
$250.00 $295.00
But in this case, auditors spent a highly unusual eight-month period
revisiting their work and substantially revising everything from the audit’s
headlines and introductory language to its list of recommendations.
Hull Caballero said she and her staff worked to get their findings and
wording “on the same page” with leaders at the clean energy program, in
part because they believed doing so would increase the likelihood program
officials would agree to make the fixes they recommended.
That departs at least somewhat from normal government auditing
practices, as auditors’ professional standards center on being independent
and objective and working to represent the public’s interest and
government accountability over bending to reach compromises.
Kip Memmott, Oregon’s state audit divisions director, said it’s commendable
to seek mutual agreement with an audited agency’s leaders so they’ll get on
board with pursuing recommendations. But such compromise should be
pursued only to a degree, he said.
Advertisement
“It’s mainly got to be evidence-compelled, not because who you’re auditing
didn’t like the tone,” said Memmott, who’s audited public agencies over a
three-decade career in three states. “You can negotiate some of that. But if
the evidence hasn’t changed, we have to go with it, whether people agree
with it or not.”
In a statement Tuesday, Hull Caballero stressed that she believes the
changes her office made to soften the audit language and
recommendations will ultimately lead to more change and better outcomes
than her office’s original, tougher take.
“Our interest is in having the program make the necessary improvements to
ensure it delivers what the voters expect,” she said. “Our final
recommendations are appropriate for the evidence we gathered within the
scope of our audit. They reflect a reassessment of some of our draft
conclusions, which management appropriately challenged, and additional
information provided by the program.”
Officials in her office acknowledged that spending more than half a year
rewriting an audit after the draft findings, public release schedule and press
release were prepared is uncommon. But they said a series of personnel
changes in the office as well as their conclusion that the agency pushback
had merits were responsible for that extended timeline.
Advertisement
STRONG VOTER BACKING
The clean energy initiative was sold to voters in 2018 as a 1% tax on large
retailers that would generate tens of millions of dollars a year to reduce
carbon emissions, create green energy job training and jobs, and promote
resiliency, with Portlanders of color designed to benefit the most. Sixty-five
percent of city voters approved it.
The program, which the city launched the next year and housed within its
planning and sustainability bureau, aims to help Portland residents facing
the most severe impacts from climate change. It also prioritizes funding for
nonprofits created and operated by members of historically marginalized
communities.
To date it has generated more than $185 million — nearly double what
officials with the city’s revenue division originally estimated. Officials with
the program expect the fund on average will award more than $60 million
annually.
The city auditor’s office launched its review in September 2020, with plans
to release a final report by the following spring or summer, records show.
The audit looked at the clean energy fund’s activity through last April, when
it approved an inaugural $9 million in grants to 45 nonprofits.
Advertisement
Hull Caballero told The Oregonian/OregonLive her office decided to audit
the program early in its development in part because it was created via a
ballot measure rather than typical policy-making channels.
By June 2021, city auditors had conducted extensive fieldwork and
produced an initial report reviewed multiple times by Hull Caballero and
supervising staff, records show.
As in the final audit, the initial report found the program had yet to formally
adopt climate and performance metrics, accountability systems and a
contractor equity plan required under the voter-approved measure.
“The city can’t say by how much the program should reduce greenhouse
gases, how many jobs it should create, or what other benefits it should
cause,” the draft report said. “In the meantime, however, the fund may issue
$69 million or more in grants without a strategy for intended results or a
way to measure and report them to the public.”
Based on their findings, the draft audit’s authors issued a dire warning
about the program, then barely two years old: “The Portland Clean Energy
Fund is in danger of falling short of its mission.”
Advertisement
DISPLEASED WITH TONE, TENOR
Records show that city auditors presented a copy of their findings and
recommendations to program officials in mid-June, then held a June 22
meeting that included Planning and Sustainability Director Andrea Durbin
and Baraso, the program’s manager, among others.
They were fundamentally opposed to what auditors had written.
Durbin said she and others were disturbed by the “tone and tenor” of the
draft report and also believed it failed to accurately reflect the work the
program had begun on its performance and accountability systems,
according to meeting notes kept by the auditor’s office.
She also said the report underplayed the fact that the fund was technically
still in its “start-up phase” until July 2022 after the City Council extended
the measure’s initial 2020 deadline by two years.
Similarly, Baraso said the report lacked an appropriate level of nuance given
the intricacies of the program and alleged that its content risked preserving
the very inequities voters wanted the clean energy fund to shatter.
Advertisement
“Sam said that the audit’s approach to the evaluation of the program and its
recommendations reinforced a narrative that (it) should only support
programs that already exist,” the meeting notes read. “He said that they
knew that approach would perpetuate racist outcomes.”
Baraso and another program staffer, Cady Lister, also chided auditors to
make sweeping changes to the draft audit, providing extensive annotations
and comments as rationale, records show. They criticized some of the
report’s word choices and headlines, struck factually true statements from
the draft and alleged numerous inaccuracies in the report.
“Given the nature of the fund and program still being in start-up, we expect
a more muted tone regarding outcomes framed as ‘success’ or ‘failure’ as
it’s too soon to evaluate on those absolute terms,” Baraso wrote.
Hull Caballero acknowledged in a recent interview that while criticism from
programs or agencies that undergo audits is common, her office received a
surprisingly large volume from the clean energy fund.
Advertisement
“There was a lot of that in this audit,” she said. “I do think that was unusual.
I attribute some of that to the fact that (the clean energy fund) is a startup.”
“I always say that when we get that kind of pushback from management,”
Hull Caballero continued, “we should come back and say, ‘There seems to
be a disconnect between what we think happened and your reaction to it.
So let’s get on the same page.’”
PUSHBACK’S IMPACT
The auditor’s office took the clean energy fund’s criticism to heart, records
show. Within days, subsequent drafts of the report began to incorporate
many of the concerns raised by program staff.
“I hope I have sufficiently documented that (I) took pains to make changes
when we could, including to the report title, many subtitles, and other
report body content,” city auditor Gordon Friedman wrote in a July 8 email
to his supervisor at the time, Tenzin Gonta. “Many of these changes were
discretionary and were done to conciliate the auditee – not to correct
factual inaccuracies.”
Advertisement
Friedman was a reporter at The Oregonian/OregonLive covering state
government and Portland City Hall from 2016 to 2019. KC Jones, who
became director of audit services in August, declined to make Friedman
available for an interview.
Records show the audit underwent multiple revisions in the ensuing months
as staff fact-checked the report and massaged its language. In late
October, Jones took over as the report’s lead writer, according to records
and interviews.
While the auditor’s office slowly finalized its review, the clean energy fund
came under scrutiny.
An Oregonian/OregonLive investigation in December revealed the fund’s
volunteer grant committee and the City Council both voted to award nearly
$12 million to a nonprofit whose leader had a long history of financial
misdeeds and unpaid taxes and appears to have substantially
misrepresented her work history.
Clean energy program officials didn’t conduct basic backgrounding of the
company, its director or the key employees named in the grant, the
newsroom review found.
Advertisement
After the news story was published, officials quickly pivoted and awarded
the money to another more established firm. Program officials also
instituted new procedures for how they will more rigorously check the work
histories of nonprofits who apply for grants in the future, but not the
criminal or financial backgrounds of those organizations’ leaders.
The city of Portland is now being sued by the nonprofit leader who lost the
lucrative contract, Linda Woodley, who alleges officials violated her due
process rights, defamed her and ultimately “destroyed” her career.
With a final audit complete and near-ready for public release, Jones held
another meeting with clean energy fund officials in early February, records
show. He told officials the process had “showed failures in communication
and not taking into account information that was provided” and that the
new version of the audit was “more practical to help with success,” notes
from the meeting show.
“Lots of nodding heads,” the meeting notes indicate.
Advertisement
Jones also told officials, however, that the underlying evidence of the audit
had remained the same, records show.
This time around, the report’s warning was a little less dire: “The Portland
Clean Energy Fund has made progress establishing the voter-approved
program, but additional steps are needed for implementation.”
Read more: Portland planning bureau director departs with $195K
severance amid climate change program problems
-- Shane Dixon Kavanaugh; 503-294-7632
Email at skavanaugh@oregonian.com
Follow on Twitter @shanedkavanaugh
About Us
Our Journalists
About OregonLive.com
Contact The Newsroom
Technical Support
Advertise With Us
Subscribe to The Oregonian
Subscriber Services
Digital Subscription FAQ
Delivery Opportunities
Accessibility Statement
Subscriptions
The Oregonian
eNewspaper
Email Newsletters
Already a Subscriber
Manage your Subscription
Place a Vacation Hold
Make a Payment
Delivery Feedback
Read More Top News
Today's Top News
Politics
Crime
Business
Commuting
Weather
Education
Homes & Gardens
Letters to the Editor
Video
Environment
Here is Oregon
Noticias en español
Special Sections
Sports
High School Sports
Ducks
Beavers
Trail Blazers
Timbers
Thorns
Recruiting News
Entertainment
Travel
TV & Movies
Eat, Drink, Cook
Comics
Your Regional News Pages
Portland
Washington County
Clackamas County
Clark County
Pacific Northwest
Follow Us
Email Newsletters
YouTube
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
RSS
Mobile
iPhone, Android apps
Tablet apps
More on OregonLive.com
Place an Ad
Autos
Jobs
Sponsor Content
Post a Job
Newspapers.com Archive
Your Privacy Rights Your Privacy Choices Privacy Policy | User Agreement | Ad Choices
Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement,
(updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights
(updated 1/1/2026).
© 2026 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used,
except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.
Ad Choices