LOCAL NEWS
Washington's proposed gas tax
angers neighboring states
Oregon Gov. Kate Brown wrote an an op-ed Tuesday urging Inslee to
“put this bad idea back on the shelf, where it belongs.”
Born Before 1977? You Could Get U
To $300 Just For Opening a Checki
Forbes Learn Mo

Author: Associated Press, Chris McGinness
Published: 12:32 PM PST February 24, 2022
Updated: 7:49 AM PST February 25, 2022
OLYMPIA, Wash. — Three states that would be affected by a proposed 6-cent per gallon tax on
fuel exported from Washington state are pushing back on the plan, and threatening to retaliate
if it is signed into law.
The tax — part of a $16.8 billion transportation revenue package that has cleared the state
Senate and is working its way through the House — is projected to raise billions over the
course of 16 years.
Ninety percent of the refined petroleum used in Oregon is imported from Washington,
according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Idaho has a more diverse array of
sources, but has no refineries. Alaska, meanwhile, is the second-most petroleum-dependent
state in the country, behind only Hawaii, and exports much of its crude oil.
The Seattle Times reports lawmakers from Alaska, Oregon and Idaho are strongly opposed to
the move, and making their feelings known through resolutions, calls and op-eds.
“Washington taking unilateral action to increase gas prices for Oregon families and businesses
is unacceptable,” Oregon Gov. Kate Brown said in a tweet last week.
RELATED: Oregon, Washington see highest gas prices in country after California, Hawaii
Brown, who said she conveyed her displeasure to Washington Gov. Jay Inslee in a phone call
last week, wrote an an op-ed Tuesday urging him to “put this bad idea back on the shelf, where
it belongs.”
Alaska Gov. Mike Dunleavy encouraged his constituents to call Inslee’s office to oppose the
tax, and the Idaho House of Representatives on Tuesday unanimously approved a joint
memorial calling on Inslee to veto the tax if it comes to his desk, warning that the Legislature
“will take any and all actions necessary to block this new tax,”
Idaho’s governor and attorney general also asked Inslee in a letter to veto the tax.
Jaime Smith, a spokeswoman for Inslee, said that the Democratic governor will sign the
transportation revenue package if it makes it to his desk.
“Funding sources are always a point of debate, and this plan is no different,” Smith said.
The tax would apply to any fuel products exported from Washington’s five refineries, which
have historically been exempt from the state’s gas tax. Lawmakers say the new revenue stream
was needed in order to not raise the state's gas tax.
Washington has the fifth-largest crude oil refining capacity in the country. Democratic Sen.
Marko Liias, chair of the Senate Transportation Committee, and other Democrats argue the tax
would help spread out the environmental burden caused by Washington’s refineries.
“This is a modest cost that has a huge return on investment, both for our state but also for our
partner states,” Liias said. As for the threats from neighboring states, Liias said, “I think a lot of it
is rhetoric.”
"There are about 80,000 people in my county that go across the old bridge to work in Oregon
and every one of the pays about 10% Oregon income tax. Having both states pay for a little bit
of infrastructure makes a whole lot of sense," said House Transportation Committee Vice Chair
Sharon Wylie, a Democrat.
Wylie referred to the Interstate Bridge Replacement Program (IBR), which has indicated it will
need upwards of a billion dollars from Oregon and Washington to build the bridge. The
proposed bill does not specifically name IBR as a recipient, but it might be on the receiving end
of the state funds.
In Alaska, Republican Rep. Kevin McCabe, is proposing a set of retaliatory taxes if Washington’s
goes into effect — 6-cents per pound of exported fish; a 6-cent per-foot mooring fee; and a $15
per-barrel surcharge on crude oil sent to Washington for refining.
“I want people in Washington to understand that Alaska is not going to take this taxation
without representation lying down,” McCabe said.
Another opponent to the bill is the Affordable Fuel Washington Coalition. They're most
concerned with another provision with HB 2119, which would require all new vehicles in
Washington be elective by 2030.
Credit: KGW
Section 416 of Washington House Bill 2119.
"It’s the most aggressive approach in the entire United States, five years ahead of California,"
said spokeswoman Dana Bieber. "I think that's something Washingtonians need to be aware of
because this is going to be a costly burden for many families."
Related Articles
ODOT awards $2M in contracts to clean up graffiti and litter in Portland
Here's an estimate on how much drivers may pay per toll on I-205
OODDOOTT ttoo rreeqquuiirree wwaatteerrffaallll ccoorrrriiddoorr ppeerrmmiittss iinn tthhee GGoorrggee
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
OHSU study finds exposure to pollution changes kid's brain development
KGW
HUGE: More KEY Players Staying at Penn State + Iowa State Players Predicted to Join!
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...