Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
ENVIRONMENT
Oct 31, 2022 at 11:38 am
Benson High School Remodel Raises Debate
Over PPS' Climate Policy
ISABELLA GARCIA
On going construction at Benson High School. PORTLAND PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Despite committing to a climate policy that prohibits the use of fossil fuels
in new buildings earlier this year, Portland Public Schools’s (PPS) latest
building remodel includes a fossil fuel-powered heating system. School
district officials attribute the fossil fuel infrastructure to construction
timelines and budget restrictions, while advocates who helped shape the
climate policy believe PPS is disregarding its commitment to climate
conscious infrastructure.
PPS adopted the Climate Crisis Response Policy (CCRP) in March 2022,
acknowledging climate change as a crisis and creating a path for how the
district is going to respond to that crisis. The policy—which was in
development by volunteers and PPS leaders for three years—guides the
district to limit its carbon emissions, transition its vehicle fleet to low-
carbon or electric, support students and staff during climate emergencies
like wildfires or floods, and develop curriculum that teaches students about
the root causes of climate change. The climate policy also commits the
district to no longer using fossil fuel infrastructure in new buildings, as well
as phasing out gas-fired equipment—like heating and cooling infrastructure
—in all existing PPS buildings by 2050.
The CCRP was celebrated as one of the most aggressive climate policies for
a school district in the nation when it was unanimously adopted by the
school board earlier this year. However, the policy does not include
consequences for PPS if the school district does not follow the policy or
meet its goals, meaning the policy only works if PPS leaders choose to
uphold it.
So, when members of the committee who developed the climate plan
learned that the ongoing remodel of Benson Polytechnic High School in
inner NE Portland includes a fossil fuel-powered heating system, their faith
in PPS’s follow-through plummeted.
“The bottom line for me is that PPS is full of shit,” said Mike Rosen, a former
PPS school board member and current environmental advocate who
helped develop the climate policy.
Rosen sees the inclusion of gas-fired infrastructure in the project as both in
conflict with the climate policy and a burden to taxpayers. PPS is paying for
the Benson remodel with voter-approved bonds from 2017 and 2020 and
will inevitably have to replace the gas-fired heating system with an electric
system by 2050, likely also at taxpayers' expense. PPS has yet to determine
how it’s going to pay to switch all of its buildings to all-electric by 2050.
PPS staff attribute the conflict to the two projects’ varying timelines—
Benson’s remodel design work began in January 2019, two years before the
climate policy was adopted, meaning that the restriction on fossil-fuel
infrastructure didn’t apply at the time. Rosen disagrees, arguing that high-
level decision makers for the Benson design were aware that the climate
policy would require PPS to stop using fossil fuel infrastructure before the
policy was adopted by the board.
Rosen, the other members of PPS’s Climate Justice Steering Committee, and
15 environmental organizations sent a letter to the PPS school board
members on October 27, urging them to further study the feasibility of
pivoting the Benson remodel to an all-electric building at this point in
construction. Benson’s construction is approximately 40 percent complete
as of the end of September.
“Last spring, we applauded PPS’s leadership in adopting this progressive
policy,” the letter reads. “However, at Benson it appears that a lack of
District coordination has resulted in PPS-employed contractors negating
this critical policy.”
The letter calls on PPS to stop fossil fuel-related work on the Benson
remodel, complete a cost-benefit analysis of gas vs. electric infrastructure
for the project, conduct an environmental impact analysis for the project,
and hold a public forum “to field concerns of students and community
members and to help build trust that the policy will be followed on future
renovation & rebuild projects.”
School board member Julia Brim-Edwards, who helped create the climate
policy, raised questions about the Benson remodel in a PPS facilities
meeting in late September. Brim-Edwards noted that the 2050 deadline for
phasing out fossil fuel infrastructure was chosen because it was assumed
that all PPS building remodels, or “modernizations,” that the district has
planned through voter-approved bonds would be designed without fossil
fuels.
“In the policy committee, we gave the district until 2050 to phase out
existing fossil fuel infrastructure, but I was really thinking that would be
about the time when we worked our way through all of the modernization
[projects] and improved things, not that we would be giving a new building
until 2050 to remove [gas-fired equipment],” Brim-Edwards said at the
facilities meeting. “I don’t know how the miscommunication happened, but
I never imagined that Benson wasn’t new construction and that it wasn’t
going to comply [with the climate policy].”
Brim-Edwards also asked PPS staff to share the cost-benefit analysis it had
performed when it was deciding whether or not to make Benson a fully-
electric school or not; PPS cited the analysis in a memo explaining its
decision for the Benson design. However, there is no singular document
that details a cost-benefit analysis of the Benson remodel, rather the
determination that switching Benson High School to an all-electric building
would be too expensive came from “a discussion” among district staff and
project engineers, according to PPS staff at the September facilities
meeting.
District staff estimate that pivoting to an all-electric design at this time
would cost an additional $6 million to $8 million and delay the project by
two years, during which Benson students would remain at the former
Marshall High School campus in SE Portland’s Lents neighborhood.
According to Aaron Presberg, manager of energy and sustainability for PPS
facilities, the construction team is determining whether Benson can be
made “electric ready”—fitted with some of the infrastructure needed to
eventually make the building all-electric—but it depends on if it can exist
within the current budget.
“These are very large, complicated projects that are in process for several
years,” Presberg said. “I understand the perception of what's going on, but
this is something that's been in process for years and it's not something that
we're doing intentionally. It's more of a timeline issue than anything else.”
School board members Gary Hollands, Amy Kohnstamm, and Herman
Greene indicated in September that they would not be interested in
recommending the district pivot Benson to an all-electric building at this
time due to the delay in getting Benson students back to their usual
campus.
PPS does not have an estimate for how much it will cost to remove or phase
out the fossil fuel infrastructure by the 2050 deadline. Rosen believes that
given inflation, rising material costs, and new research about methane gas
leakage, it would be less expensive and safer in the long run to build Benson
all-electric now instead of waiting.
“They're kicking the can down the road at a significant cost to taxpayers,”
Rosen said, “which I think they take for granted.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: ENVIRONMENT NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In Environment
Amid Grim Outlook for National Climate Investments, Portland’s Clean Energy Fund
Doles Out Nearly $64 Million
Zenith Energy Legal Fight Highlights Gaps in Portland’s Environmental Guardrails
Updated: County Declares Emergency as Portland Faces Dangerous, Extended Heat Wave
An Amphibian Resistance
Updated: The Willamette River is Swimmable Again, Health Officials Say
For a Glimpse Into Portland's Thriving Future, Look to the River
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: In Honor of Short Kings. Plus: Ingenius Legal Defense Strategies,
Bears in Portland, and Portland in Song
Skinny Scarves, Skinny Celebs, Mediocre Men, and CATS!
The Biggest Portland Labor News of 2023
The Biggest Portland Environmental News of 2023
THE TRASH REPORT: Trump's Tacky Conviction, ScarJo's Miscalculation, and To Be Chosen
by a Bat
THE TRASH REPORT: Where In the Sewer Is Rudy Giuliani? Plus: Bloody Royals and Dating
While Hot
Popular Articles
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Zenith Permit Decision Raises Questions, Conflicts About City Council Authority
New Council Committee Grapples With Portland’s Slipping Climate Goals
Portland Hearings Officer Signs Off on PGE's Forest Park Utility Plan
Fueling Portland’s Future: Renewable Fuels Come Under the Microscope at City Hall
An Amphibian Resistance
For a Glimpse Into Portland's Thriving Future, Look to the River
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286