Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Mar 16, 2022 at 12:41 pm
Energy Nonprofit Leader Sues City Following
Grant Rejection
ISABELLA GARCIA
A lady of justice statue
JULIUS ADAMEK / EYEEM / GETTY IMAGES
A nonprofit leader is suing the city of Portland for defamation after the city
rescinded a $11.5 million green energy grant from her organization earlier
this year.
In December, the city of Portland awarded energy nonprofit Diversifying
Energy a grant to coordinate the purchase of portable heat pumps and
other cooling units for vulnerable Portlanders. The $11.5 million grant was
awarded through the Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF)—a public green
energy fund that aims to make climate-conscious investments in
communities of color and other communities who will be impacted first
and worst by climate change. Diversifying Energy was chosen by PCEF’s
grant committee because of the organization’s past work experience and its
racially diverse employees.
However, an investigation by the Oregonian published less than two weeks
later cast doubt on the professional experience of Diversifying Energy’s
director Linda Woodley. According to the Oregonian, Woodley played a
much smaller role in previous green energy projects than she alluded to in
her PCEF application and several people at partner organizations that
Woodley had claimed to have collaborated with did not recall working with
her at all. The investigation also pointed to time Woodley spent in prison
for financial crimes and that she was subject to state tax liens in 2021.
In response to the article, PCEF staff asked Woodley to provide specific
references of people she worked with previously who could verify her
experience executing a major energy program. While Woodley handed over
references and copies of previous contracts, Portland City Commissioner
Carmen Rubio—who oversees PCEF—determined there were still too many
inconsistencies and moved the City Council to revoke the grant from
Diversifying Energy. The grant was subsequently awarded to a different
organization.
In a lawsuit filed with the US District Court for the District of Oregon
Wednesday, Woodley alleges that the city defamed her, violated her due
process rights, and destroyed her career when they stripped the PCEF grant
from Diversifying Energy. Woodley’s lawsuit also claims that the Oregonian’s
article mischaracterized Woodley's previous financial crimes.
“Ironically, [PCEF] is designed to bolster ecological resiliency in Portland’s
communities of color—communities whose members disproportionately
are accused and convicted of crimes, and that lose future opportunities as a
result,” the lawsuit reads. “That is the precise harm that the City inflicted on
Woodley.”
The lawsuit notes that the original PCEF grant application did not require
personal references and claims that PCEF staff were talking to the wrong
people while they were trying to verify Woodley’s work history, despite
Woodley telling PCEF staff that the people they were talking to had no
reason to know who she was.
According to the lawsuit, Woodley was given approximately 40 hours to
provide contact information for previous co-workers that she hadn’t spoken
to in years, a timeframe the lawsuit frames as unrealistic and hasty.
After revoking the grant from Diversifying Energy, PCEF adopted a new risk
assessment evaluation for future grant proposals that aims to avoid a
repeat of the situation. The new risk assessment process will give grant
applicants six days to provide additional information, like personal
references and previous contracts, if they are a newer organization or
asking for a significant amount of grant funding. The lawsuit cites the
difference in response time Woodley was given versus future applicants will
be allotted as evidence Woodley’s due process rights were violated.
“Unfortunately, it took PCEF utterly botching Linda’s reference check,
targeting her because of her mistakes decades ago, and ruining her
reputation for it to realize its grant review processes were haphazard and
needed attention,” said Clifford Davidson, Woodley’s lawyer, in a press
release. “PCEF’s learning moment came at the expense of Linda’s career.”
Woodley is seeking $600,000 in damages—the amount of income she
believes she would have received over the next several years until her
planned retirement.
Spokespeople for PCEF and Commissioner Carmen Rubio said they were
unable to comment on pending litigation.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Proposed Detention Center Fee Yields Hostile City Council Meeting
Workers in Portland’s Independent Police Investigation Unit Authorize a Strike
Mercury Endorsement: Vote Yes on the Portland Parks Levy
Introducing the Portland Mercury’s Newest Reporter, Jeremiah Hayden!
Portland Police Officer Arrested on Domestic Violence Charges
City Leaders Say Trump Administration Has Sent Influx of Federal Agents to Portland
Editors' Picks
Get Ready! The Mercury's SANDWICH WEEK Arrives This Monday, June 5! 🥪
THE TRASH REPORT: The Trash Report's Nemesis, We're All on the Cameron Diaz Diet,
Constitutional Law, and Hamster Science
Portland Timbers Fire Head Coach Giovanni Savarese
The Mercury's November 2024 VOTER CHEAT SHEET!
Portland City Council Stops Transparency Advocate Proposal from Going to Voters In
May
Happy 25th Anniversary, Portland Mercury!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286