Home / Auditor's Office / Audit Services / News
Visiting the Auditor’s Office at City Hall
We're open Monday to Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. We accept in-person visits Tuesday to Thursday at
City Hall in room 130. For more information about how to connect with us either in person or remotely,
please see our contact information on our homepage or visit our contact information webpage.
Portland Clean Energy Fund: Additional steps needed to implement
voter-approved program
Contact
Report
KC Jones
Audit Services Director
kenneth.c.jones@portlando
regon.gov
503-823-3544
Translations
Fondo de Energía Limpia de
Portland: Pasos adicionales
 View full size image
necesarios para implementar
Voters approved a tax to create the Portland Clean Energy Fund in el programa aprobado por los
votantes (Spanish)
2018 as an ambitious way to tackle climate change and social
inequities. This audit found that the program began putting
Портлендский Фонд Чистой
management systems in place but other elements were not yet Энергии: Дополнительные
implemented or needed direction from City Council. шаги, необходимые для
реализации одобренной
Published: March 10, 2022 12:00 am
избирателями программы
(Russian)
Translate this Page Quỹ Năng Lượng Sạch
English Español Русский Tiếng Việt 简体中⽂ Portland: Các bước bổ sung
cần thiết để thực hiện chương
trình do cử tri phê duyệt
Print a PDF of the report
(Vietnamese)
波特兰⼲净能源基⾦: 实施选⺠通
过的计划所需的额外步骤
(Chinese)
Summary
Voters approved a tax to create the Portland Clean Energy Fund in 2018 as
an ambitious way to tackle climate change and social inequities. At the end
of the last fiscal year, the tax had generated more than $185 million since
its inception. The Portland Clean Energy Fund program in the Bureau of
Planning and Sustainability expected to spend $60 million on grants
annually to achieve the legislation’s goals.
This audit assessed whether the program put management systems in
place to implement the legislation. We found that the program had made
progress with some elements, but othe rs were not yet fully implemented or
needed direction from City Council. The program:
Began developing accountability systems but needs timeframes for
completion;
Needed guidance from its volunteer committee and decisions by
Council on climate goals, capacity building, and expectations for
oversight; and
Identified challenges in managing the upcoming administrative cost
limit because of unpredictable revenues.
Not addressing these elements could jeopardize the City’s ability to meet
the legislative intent of the voter-approved program.
Staff and volunteer committee members who manage the program should
set timeframes to complete all elements of the legislation and make plans
transparent. In areas where goals, responsibilities, or intentions were
unclear, Planning and Sustainability management and committee members
should seek guidance from Council, propose legislative amendments to City
Code where necessary, and refine their systems accordingly.
Initiative petition set path for program
A diverse coalition of community members and nonprofit leaders created
the initiative petition for the Portland Clean Energy Fund. During its
campaign for voters’ support, the coalition said the program would address
an immediate need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, create clean
energy jobs, and benefit underserved communities. Sixty-five percent of
voters approved the measure in November 2018.
Some of the program’s benefits are intended to result from projects funded
by grants. For example, the legislation – which became City Code after
voters approved it – envisioned revenue from the program to pay for
projects to deliver climate and equity benefits in the following areas:
Source: Portland Clean Energy Fund legislation
If the project
Then it should: And also:
category is:
Broaden access to
Renewable energy
energy efficiency Benefit low-income people
and energy efficiency
and renewable and people of color
programs
energy
Support nonprofit
Clean energy jobs Prioritize entry organizations serving
training, into union- economically disadvantaged
apprenticeships, and registered and underrepresented
contractor support apprentice trades people in the skilled
workforce
Capture
Regenerative greenhouse gases Focus on low-income
agriculture and and support people and communities of
green infrastructure sustainable local color
food production
Provide flexibility
to fund a project
Provide an opportunity to
Future innovation that does not fall
further program goals
under one of the
other categories
The program generates money by taxing certain large retailers operating in
Portland. Program budgets projected granting $60 million a year beginning
Fiscal Year 2021-22.
Revenue generated by the tax outperformed early estimates. City officials
expected revenues of $44 million to $61 million annually. Actual revenues
were $63 million in Fiscal Year 2019-20 and $116 million in Fiscal Year 2020-
21.
A nine-member volunteer committee has some program implementation
responsibilities. Committee members must be Portlanders reflecting the
City’s racial, ethnic, and economic diversity. At least two members must live
east of 82nd Avenue. They must also have expertise in areas that were
prioritized in the legislation, such as renewable energy or workforce
development. Staff in the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability manage the
program’s daily activities.
AUDIT RESULTS
We assessed whether the program put management systems in place to
implement the legislation. We focused on systems outlined in the
legislation that would have program-wide benefits. We did not examine
individual grant awards.
We found that the program had made progress with some elements, but
others were not yet fully implemented or needed direction from City
Council. The program:
Began developing accountability systems but needs timeframes for
completion;
Needed guidance from its volunteer committee and decisions by
Council on climate goals, capacity building, and expectations for
oversight; and
Identified challenges in managing the upcoming administrative cost
limit because of unpredictable revenues.
Not addressing these elements could jeopardize the City’s ability to meet
the legislative intent of the voter-approved program.
During the time period covered by this audit, the program hired staff,
recruited Council-appointed volunteers to serve on the committee, engaged
the public, and issued its first grant application solicitation and awards.
Staff and committee members worked together for more than a year to
create the solicitation and recommend projects for funding. They
undertook a detailed planning and public engagement process to do so.
The program adopted a preliminary performance measurement and
reporting system and identified information to collect to prepare a
workforce and contractor equity plan.
Finalizing those essential elements should involve consideration of
tradeoffs and risks and transparency with Council and the public to ensure
the program meets expectations. We address some of the tradeoffs and
risks in the following sections, which remain present while the program is
issuing tens of millions annually in grants.
Accountability systems not finalized
The purpose of the voter-approved program was to provide funding and
oversight “to ensure that the City of Portland’s Climate Action Plan is
implemented in a manner that supports social, economic, and
environmental benefits for all Portlanders” and ensures a diverse
contractor and workforce pool. To do that, the measure directed the
program’s committee to:
allocate funds in specified, proportional categories to the extent
possible;
adopt a performance measurement and reporting system; and
adopt a workforce and contractor equity plan with ambitious,
measurable goals.
Plan for reporting spending by category complicated by approach
chosen
The committee recommended its first portfolio of grants to City Council in
April 2021, which Council approved unanimously. The portfolio included
awards totaling $8.6 million via 45 grants.
The legislation set ranges to guide the program of the proportion of funding
that should go to each category to the extent possible.
Source: Portland Clean Energy Fund legislation
If the funding category is: then it should get:
renewable energy or energy efficiency 40-60% of funds
clean energy jobs training, apprenticeships, and contractor support 20-25% of funds
regenerative agriculture and green infrastructure 10-15% of funds
future innovation 5% of funds
The program did not report on whether its activities by grant category were
consistent with target proportions in the legislation. The presentation of the
recommended grants to Council used descriptions that were a mix of
funding category and grant type. The narrative generally stated that small
and large grants were distributed within the target funding areas, and
planning grants were distributed across all areas.
Source: Funding allocations reported by Portland Clean Energy Fund to City Council in
April 2021. Note: The "Multi" category represents a small grant that addressed two
funding categories (clean energy and workforce).
The program planned to report on funding allocations based on a three-
year rolling average and anticipated the possibility of funding falling outside
of the legislation’s allocation goals in any given year. This approach was
noted in draft grant application requirements and scoring guidance issued
for public comment in June 2020. Program managers said in an audit
interview that reporting by funding categories will be based on actual
dollars spent rather than grant award amounts. That means the earliest
opportunity to report on initial spending by grantees will be in 2022. In
addition, staff explained this accounting is particularly important for the
$2.5 million in planning grants which may have variation between
anticipated and final funding categories.
Reporting methods were discussed among committee members and staff
but had not been finalized or presented to Council. Reporting the average
for actual dollars on a rolling three-year basis will make it hard for the
program to have the timely financial information it needs to ensure
allocations match the proportions called for in the legislation, and to know
and advertise how much is available for future grants.
Program planned to use grant information to inform performance
goals
The program had not adopted a methodology to measure, track, and report
performance – as required by the legislation – but began laying the
foundation for it in April 2020. The committee established an evaluation
and reporting subcommittee in November 2020 to discuss program metrics
as well as grantee outputs and outcomes. Planning and Sustainability’s
budget request as submitted in January 2021 stated the program
anticipated collecting performance data, including disaggregated
demographic information tied to grant investments, to understand and
adapt the program. Staff anticipated that the development of its program-
level performance measures would occur over the next two-to-three fiscal
years.
The committee reviewed a draft list of performance measures in April 2020
that was used to inform grant application questions, scoring criteria, and
reporting requirements. For example, staff included greenhouse gas
impacts in their early feasibility screening of these inaugural grants. In its
presentation seeking Council approval, staff used the metric of “estimated
lifetime reduction in greenhouse gas emissions for projects with physical
improvements is roughly 11,500 metric tons.” Grantees committed in their
grant agreements to being measured by and reporting data for that metric.
All grant recipients have common reporting requirements as well as those
that are specific to the type, size, and phase of the grants. For example, a
green infrastructure project will need to report on the area of the project in
terms of acres or square feet. A regenerative agriculture project will report
on the estimated volume of annual harvest. Staff and the committee
intended for these reporting requirements to provide the program with
meaningful information needed to be accountable to Council and the
public. Ensuring that grantees provide valid performance data will be
fundamental to the implementation of the program’s goals and its ability to
communicate reliable results to Council and the public.
Work in progress for workforce and contractor equity goal setting
The legislation required the committee to adopt a workforce and contractor
equity plan with ambitious, measurable goals for training and hiring people
from historically disadvantaged groups. The measure said the committee
should consult with appropriate stakeholders as well as incorporate City
procurement practices to develop the plan and goals.
Program staff said during meetings with the committee and stakeholders
that information was not yet available to set meaningful goals. Staff
identified the need for a labor market study designed for the types of
projects the program was set up to fund. Existing labor market data were
not useful because they were for larger-scale projects than those likely to
receive grants from the program.
As a result, the program has been using a preliminary approach since
January 2020 while it obtains the information it needs for defining goals.
That approach includes gathering information from grant applications and
scoring criteria that, as noted earlier, was developed by staff and committee
members using a public engagement process that reflected a variety of
stakeholders and a public comment period.
Notably, templates for workforce and contractor equity agreements called
for in the legislation were tailored to the different types of grants and
projects and informed by the public and committee feedback as well as a
review of accepted practices. They covered a variety of complex technical
areas, such as thresholds for when prevailing wage rates would be
required.
Staff said all grantees agreed in writing to provide the baseline information
needed for performance measurement, such as disaggregated
demographic data about the workforce and contractors used for funded
projects. The program also planned and budgeted for a labor market study
to be conducted this Fiscal Year 2021-22 to supplement the information
reported by grantees. As noted earlier, Planning and Sustainability
anticipated that the development of the program’s performance measures
– including those related to workforce and contractor equity – would occur
over the next two-to-three fiscal years.
Program needs guidance on climate goals, capacity building,
and oversight
While the initiative petition set the path for implementation, additional
guidance from the committee and decisions by Council are needed for core
aspects of the program. That is because the legislation referenced since-
expired climate system criteria, provided limited direction about capacity
building, and did not specify who was responsible for oversight. Similar to
other areas we report on in this audit, addressing each of these elements
involves consideration of tradeoffs and risks and transparency with Council
and the public to ensure the program meets expectations.
Funding categories take precedence as Climate Action Plan has
expired
The legislation tied goals for the program to the City’s Climate Action Plan,
but it expired in 2020. The Climate Action Plan set a vision for Portland’s
local climate strategies and included 20 objectives and 247 action items.
The Bureau of Planning and Sustainability, which developed the Climate
Action Plan, did not anticipate a new plan to be finished for several years.
Staff said that in lieu of the Climate Action Plan, they used Council’s 2020
climate emergency declaration for guidance. Council adopted the
declaration about a year and a half after voters approved the measure. In
part, Council’s declaration:
Set new goals for reducing carbon emissions to 50 percent below 1990
levels by 2030 and reaching net-zero emissions by 2050; and
Directed Planning and Sustainability to launch an equity-focused
climate justice initiative in partnership with other governments and
members of the public.
The Portland Clean Energy Fund’s related City Code has not been amended
with this replacement criteria, which left the program to determine for itself
how to contribute to the City’s updated climate strategy. This is particularly
important for the committee whose legislative responsibilities to evaluate
the program’s effectiveness and recommend changes to Council refer to
the Climate Action Plan, not the emergency declaration.
The program needs to understand Council’s perspective on how the
legislation’s funding categories fit into the City’s climate emergency
declaration. Without Council’s input, the City could miss opportunities for
the program to prioritize within its funding categories to help effectively
achieve those goals most relevant to Portland’s climate emergency
declaration.
Program needs clarity on capacity building
Community organizations may need help building their capacity to compete
for grants and deliver the outcomes the legislation intended. Examples of
capacity building activities include pay for employees, financial records
management, staff training, and technology investments.
The legislation referenced the importance of capacity building and allowed
the committee to consider it in funding decisions but did not elaborate on
how it should be implemented. As a result of public input, the committee’s
adopted guiding principles for the design and implementation of the
program included capacity building in its “community powered” principle.
The program paid for a variety of capacity building activities during the
audit period without a working definition of which activities should qualify
as such. The program offered translation and interpretation services as well
technical assistance – such as grant writing and budgeting workshops – to
help lower the barriers to entry for organizations interested in receiving
project grants from the program. The inaugural grants awarded in April
2021 may also include capacity building components, depending on the
grantee and proposed project.
There was more capacity building guidance and strategy tied to the smaller-
scale portfolio of grants. The committee recommended in June 2020, and
Council approved, competitive grants of up to $5,000 to help smaller
nonprofit organizations – particularly those that serve communities of color
– build their internal capacity and prepare for future grant opportunities.
The initial allocation of $200,000 for Application Support Grants expanded
in April 2021 to $400,000 with the creation of an ongoing Mini-Grant
Program for projects and activities that can include capacity building.
While the legislation prioritized funding individuals, communities, and
organizations that have been historically under-resourced, greater clarity
about capacity building could help the committee ensure it is considered in
its grant recommendations. In addition, clarity of purpose could help
determine whether the program should establish performance goals to
achieve better outcomes consistent with its adopted “community powered”
guiding principle.
No oversight body specified; responsibility ultimately remains with
Council
An effective oversight body looks after a program’s operations as well as
scrutinizes and questions management’s activities. Unlike other voter-
approved programs, the legislation that created the Portland Clean Energy
Fund did not assign its committee of volunteers with oversight
responsibilities. Rather, the “oversight structure” for the program is the
legislation itself.
While not explicitly charged with oversight, the language in the legislation
assigned the program’s committee more responsibilities as well as a
different relationship to Council and staff than similar City advisory bodies.
The Fund also differs from the City’s other voter-approved programs
because it was created by an initiative petition rather than a Council-
developed referral to the ballot.
Many of the additional responsibilities assigned to the committee would
otherwise be performed by City staff. We compared the powers and
responsibilities of advisory bodies for other voter-approved City programs:
Arts Tax, Children’s Levy, Fixing Our Streets, and Housing Bond. Unlike
them, the Fund’s committee has the unique authority to hire its own staff.
The combination of two of the committee’s primary responsibilities as
identified in the legislation requires it to objectively evaluate its own work,
which may make it difficult for members to be skeptical of their decisions,
provide criticism, or correct problems. The two responsibilities are 1) to
make funding recommendations to the Mayor and Council, and 2) to
evaluate the effectiveness of the program in achieving the goals of the
legislation. The committee is expected to help design, implement, and
oversee core elements of grantmaking – which is why it is publicly
referenced as a “grant committee” – but is also responsible for the
evaluation of those activities.
Without clear oversight responsibilities assigned to the committee, Council
remains ultimately responsible for decisions even though the legislation
also created unique checks on Council’s governance of the program. The
Mayor and Council are supposed to appoint the committee’s nominees
unless there is a good cause not to. Council also is required by the
legislation to explain its actions if Council rejects the committee’s
grantmaking recommendations. The legislation says Council “shall provide
the Committee with a written explanation of the decision,” and Council’s
reasoning is to be posted to the program’s webpage.
The volunteer committee deserves credit for its activities to date. The
workload for the inaugural group of unpaid volunteers was substantial,
including attending night meetings, scoring applications, and serving on
subcommittees. Program staff said they were working with the volunteers
to make committee responsibilities less time-intensive.
Staff viewed the committee and Council as sharing oversight of the
program. The committee was responsible for initial deliberations while
Council made final decisions. Based on a report by one of the chief
petitioners, the legislation envisioned the program’s governance model to
include community leadership to ensure equity was integrated in the
program’s implementation. In a 2019 audit, we reported on the tradeoffs
that exist when volunteer committees are tasked with oversight. It will be
important for Council to monitor whether the Fund’s legislation is working
as intended, responsibilities are exercised as assigned, and new inequities
are not introduced.
Cost cap, variable revenue challenge program planning
The program used two types of cost categories: programmatic and
administrative. The legislation capped the amount the program should
spend on administrative costs to 5 percent of tax revenues, but excluded
tax collection and audit costs from this limit. The initiative petition
scheduled the administrative cap to take effect in 2021. Delays in hiring and
committee appointments prompted Council to revise the legislation and
extend the implementation of the cost cap to July 2022.
Costs should be clarified
Administrative costs for organizations vary based on the number and
amounts of grants awarded, staffing, and other factors. Because there is no
industry benchmark for the amount an administrative cap should be or
what costs should count against it, management has discretion in deciding
which costs it categorizes as administrative. There are tradeoffs with that
discretion because a dollar spent on administrative costs is a dollar not
spent directly on programmatic grants or activities to achieve the
organization’s goals.
Staffing is categorized as an administrative cost in the legislation, but other
types of costs may be harder to identify as programmatic or administrative.
For example, in the absence of legislative guidance, the program classified
capacity-building activities, trainings for grant applicants, the labor market
study, and project quality assurance services as programmatic rather than
administrative costs. The program requested more than $1 million in its
budget for these types of costs Fiscal Year 2021-22. Staff members said they
planned to seek an opinion from financial auditors about whether their
classification of these costs was appropriate. Without a transparent
categorization of costs, the program’s reputation is at risk should Council or
the public question its accounting for and compliance with the
administrative cost cap.
Budgeting with unpredictable revenue was difficult
Effective program management involves marrying available budget and
project opportunities to achieve programmatic goals. Predicting how much
revenue the tax would generate was difficult because it was new and
implemented while Covid-19 was impacting the economy. Because the sum
available for administrative costs is a percentage of revenue, it will be a
challenge to manage the program’s potentially volatile operating budget
from one year to the next, especially if there is a sharp economic downturn.
There are two issues that made budgeting difficult for the program. The
first is the difference between estimated and actual revenues, and the
second is the timing of when actual revenues are available to spend.
The Revenue Division in the Office of Management and Finance originally
estimated annual tax receipts of $54 million to $71 million. The estimates
were adjusted downward in December 2019 to $44 million to $61 million
after Council approved changes about how large retailers were taxed.
Actual revenues were $63 million in Fiscal Year 2019-20 and $116 million in
Fiscal Year 2020-21. There was a sharp increase in revenues at the end of
the most recent fiscal year because retailers paying the tax outperformed
projections. The administrative cost limit, therefore, would have been about
$3.1 million one year and $5.8 million the next.
The timing of when revenue is collected and when it is available to the
program was also tricky. The time lag made managing the receipts complex.
The Revenue Division must reconcile receipts from actual taxes owed based
on filed returns to prepayments made based on estimated taxes owed.
Council adopted a prepayment grace period for the program’s initial tax
year in 2019 and waived penalties and interest on overdue amounts. As a
result, the Revenue Division decided not to provide updated revenue
estimates for the program until it obtains enough information to present a
more stable estimate. The Revenue Division said it will be able to provide
better estimates once the tax matures over the next year or two.
This necessitated some guesswork from the program on its ability to
operate within the upcoming administrative cost cap. Management
reported in its requested budget for Fiscal Year 2021-22 that its
administrative cost rate would be 5.2% by using the midpoint in the
Revenue Division’s projected range, which was $52.5 million. Staff said the
program would research whether to change the calculation of the
administrative rate from an annual to a cumulative basis to provide more
consistency for budget management. It is important that Council
understand how management is using its discretion to categorize costs and
which assumptions underlie reports of its performance against the cap to
determine if adjustments are needed.
Recommendations
The Commissioner-in-charge and the Director of the Bureau of Planning
and Sustainability should work with the committee to ensure the Portland
Clean Energy Fund:
1. Sets timeframes and publicly presents plans to Council for:
Reporting on funding allocations by category;
Setting program performance goals and developing reporting
system; and
Completing their workforce and contractor equity plan.
2. Proposes to Council a plan for how the program will proceed with the
legislation’s climate initiatives given that the Climate Action Plan has
expired.
3. Proposes to Council guidelines for the purpose, qualifying activities,
and desired outcomes of capacity-building spending for the program.
4. Evaluates oversight responsibilities and, if needed, seeks input and
proposes legislative changes to Council.
5. Clarifies and communicates to Council which expenses are included as
administrative costs subject to the cap.
6. Continues to work with the Revenue Division to obtain timely revenue
reports to improve budgeting and administrative cost management.
Commissioner, Bureau, and Committee Co-Chairs generally
agreed with our recommendations
View the joint response to the audit from the Commissioner-in-charge,
Planning and Sustainability Director, and Committee Co-Chairs.
How we did our work
The objective of this audit was to assess whether the Portland Clean Energy
Fund program had put management systems in place to implement the
legislation. Our audit period covers activity from February 2019 when
Council first adopted Code changes after voters approved the initiative to
April 2021 when Council approved of the program’s inaugural portfolio of
grants. The one exception being revenue numbers that were based on
audited financial statements as of June 2021 (Fiscal Year 2020-21).
Individual grant awards were outside of the scope because none had been
awarded at the start of the audit.
To accomplish our objectives, we:
Reviewed Measure 26-201, relevant Portland City Code and City
administrative rules, and available and applicable program guides,
budgets, procedures, and committee records;
Interviewed employees in the Bureau of Planning and Stainability,
members of the program committee, other relevant City officials,
members of the Measure 26-201 coalition, and Energy Trust of Oregon
staff;
Reviewed City Council actions, meeting minutes, and related
supporting documentation;
Reviewed and assessed inaugural grant information, and interviewed
application support grant recipients;
Assessed administrative spending by comparing revenues and
budgeted expenditures against the administrative cost cap;
Assessed climate, equity, and accountability system requirements in
Code against program activities completed during the audit period;
Assessed the program’s oversight system against standards for
internal control;
Reviewed the oversight roles and responsibilities for other voter-
approved City programs: Arts Tax, Children’s Levy, Fixing Our Streets,
and Housing Bond; and
Reviewed relevant audits published by our office as well as other
jurisdictions.
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Audit Team: Tenzin Gonta, Performance Auditor III, Gordon Friedman,
Performance Auditor I, Elizabeth Pape, Performance Auditor II