Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Sep 15, 2022 at 1:48 pm
Commissioner Rubio Proposes an Overhaul to
the Portland Clean Energy Fund
The proposal would allow for-profit and government agencies to be funded with PCEF grants.
ISABELLA GARCIA
PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY FUND
The Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF) could soon be distributing large
amounts of its yearly grant funding to government agencies and for-profit
businesses along with community-based nonprofits, according to proposed
program changes introduced by Portland City Commissioner Carmen
Rubio Thursday. PCEF supporters believe the proposed changes maintain
the integrity of the program’s mission while being responsive to the urgency
of climate change.
Established by ballot measure in 2018, PCEF uses a surcharge on large
retailers to award grants to community organizations for green energy
projects that reduce carbon emissions, create renewable energy jobs, and
benefit communities that disproportionately suffer from the effects of
climate change. It's the only program in the nation that combines this
funding model with climate and social equity goals.
The latest proposed changes follow a critical city audit of PCEF published
last year that found that the young program needed to better define its
carbon reduction goals and align itself more closely with the city’s climate
plans. A press release announcing the proposal Thursday claimed the
changes would allow PCEF to deliver funding for larger projects that would
address the city’s climate goals more quickly.
“Each week, we face new, mounting evidence that climate change is
accelerating, and our opportunity to respond is closing,” said Rubio in the
press release. “Through PCEF, we have the opportunity to complete big
projects that help to reduce carbon from our two largest sources of
emissions – transportation and housing – and make historic investments in
our city’s tree canopy. We must make these investments happen as quickly
as possible, and we can do so without compromising oversight and
accountability, or community vision.”
For the past two years, PCEF has accepted grant applications from
community-based nonprofits for a variety of programs, like energy
efficiency and workforce development. The PCEF Grant Committee, a team
of nine volunteers, then reviews the hundreds of applications and scores
them on feasibility and relevance to PCEF’s mission of investing in
historically underserved communities, like low-income communities and
people of color. The highest scoring grant proposals for each funding area
are then recommended for approval by City Council. This year, the fund
doled out over $100 million in funding for green energy projects—the
largest investment in climate change mitigation in Portland’s history.
Under Rubio’s proposal—which must first be approved by City Council—
the PCEF Grant Committee would be tasked with developing a five-year
climate investment plan that would dictate funding allotments for specific
climate goals in the city. For example, Rubio’s proposal directs the
committee to require that PCEF distribute $40 million towards tree canopy
growth and maintenance over the next five years. That plan would then be
used as a guide for PCEF staff members—not volunteers—to evaluate
proposals for both grants and contracts from non-profits, private
businesses, and government entities to carry out those funding priorities.
While the proposal would expand PCEF eligibility for for-profit businesses,
the program would maintain some restrictions. For example, a private
company, not just a nonprofit, could receive PCEF funding to purchase and
distribute heat pumps and cooling units through PCEF's ongoing Heat
Response Program. However, according to Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability spokesperson Magan Reed, a for-profit company could not
apply for PCEF funds to build a new energy efficient house or be the sole
recipient of grant funding. The changes would specifically allow
government entities like schools to be recipients of funding.
In order to increase the amount of PCEF staff to review grant and contract
proposals, the administration funding cap—the limit placed on how much
money PCEF can use for its staff based on what it collects from the
business surcharge—would be raised from 5 percent to 12 percent.
According to Jenny Lee, deputy director of the Coalition of Communities of
Color (CCC), Rubio’s proposal is responsive to Portland’s rapidly changing
climate while maintaining the original values of the PCEF program. When
CCC was advocating for PCEF’s creation in 2018, the fund was viewed as a
way to hold businesses who contribute the most to the city's carbon
emissions accountable by using a one percent business surcharge to
generate revenue for clean energy projects. As Portland proceeded to
experience severe ice storms, historic wildfires, and multiple deadly heat
waves, it became increasingly clear that the city needs to act more quickly
to start mitigating the impacts of climate change, and PCEF’s funds may be
the solution.
Due to unexpected surges in retail profits during the pandemic, PCEF has
generated more revenue than originally anticipated. PCEF originally
planned to distribute $40 to $60 million per year in grant funding, but
ramped up to distribute over $100 million in grants during its second round
of funding after exceeding its revenue projections.
By leveraging the fund’s resources, Lee believes the proposed changes will
allow PCEF to finance major climate projects in the city while
simultaneously continuing its community-based grant giving.
“This is such a huge opportunity with the scale of resources we have that we
can respond to [climate change at scale],” Lee said. “We can do both; we can
achieve the heart of PCEF’s vision, and we do have faith in the ability to
make sure that there's also community accountability as all of these
changes are being implemented.”
Lee noted that if the proposed changes were used to back city projects that
don’t center historically underserved communities that are most vulnerable
to climate change, CCC and other PCEF supporters would lobby city
council for further changes to the program.
It’s unclear if the private businesses and government agencies that would
be made eligible for PCEF grants and contracts under the new proposal
would be required to meet the same community representation
requirements currently in place for nonprofits.
PCEF was created with the intention of investing resources for climate
change mitigation in historically underserved communities, specifically
BIPOC and low-income Portlanders. In order to make sure the money is
flowing into those communities, an applicant’s score was heavily impacted
by whether the nonprofit's board was representative of the underserved
community members the project would benefit. Because for-profit
businesses and government agencies aren’t required to have executive
boards, it’s unclear how PCEF staff would evaluate that requirement.
“We maintain our commitment to ensuring PCEF investments support the
community members who have been historically marginalized and left out
of the critical resources needed to live equitably in the city,” said Bureau of
Planning and Sustainability spokesperson Magan Reed. “ We will be
working closely with internal and external stakeholders and the PCEF
Committee to work out the details of these and other areas to ensure our
continued work benefits the most vulnerable members of our community.”
Commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty, who has been a crucial supporter of PCEF
as the program has faced scrutiny in its early years, is supportive of the
proposed changes, according to her spokesperson Matt McNally.
Rubio will present the proposal to the PCEF Grant Committee Thursday
evening for input. The proposal will go in front of City Council on October
19 for discussion and public comment.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
Update: Oregon Lawmakers Make Another Go at a Transportation Funding Package
Portland City Council is Using City Codes to Fight Back Against Trump
“Not a Rubber Stamp”: Portland City Council Questions Settlement in Bike Bill Lawsuit
With a New Media Conglomerate on the Scene, Oregon’s News Landscape is Shrinking
Legacy Staff and Nurses Union Say Hospital Policies Harm Immigrants
Editors' Picks
Bad Idea, Right?
Brain-Tickling Trivia About this Week's Election from Hell (and Other Events that
Summoned the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse)
THE TRASH REPORT: Celebrity Flames (Not the Fun Kind), a Nepo Baby King, and Guess
Who's Bringing SexyBike?
Portland City Council Approves Incentives for Office-to-Apartment Building Conversions
POP QUIZ PDX: Our Most Patriotic, Sassy-Ass, and EXPLOSIVE Trivia Quiz Yet! 💥
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Pants Trivia About Hackers! Robots! And Assholes Who Act Like
Robots!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286