Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jul 20, 2022 at 5:34 pm
Portland City Council Approves $107 Million in
Green Energy Grants—Here’s Where the Money
is Going
The grants are the single largest climate investment in the city’s history.
ISABELLA GARCIA
MOTOYA NAKAMURA / MULTNOMAH COUNTY
Portland City Council approved $107 million in clean energy grants
Wednesday, the largest single investment in climate-related projects in the
city’s history. The grants are funded through the Portland Clean Energy
Fund (PCEF), a first-of-its-kind program that uses a surcharge on large
retailers in the city to fund green energy projects that prioritize low-income
Portlanders and communities of color.
Last week, council members interrogated the grant recommendations and
progress in grant vetting the program has made since PCEF was widely
criticized for awarding a grant last year to a nonprofit whose director's
experience could not be verified. To address any lingering hesitancy,
Commissioner Carmen Rubio—who oversees the Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability (BPS) which houses PCEF—directed PCEF staff to preform
additional review all of the approved grant recipients over the next 45 days.
If the second review process reveals any red flags about the recipients, BPS
director Donnie Oliveira has the authority to revoke the grant before any
money is officially awarded.
"We can both immediately invest in climate resiliency and carefully develop
a responsive, accountable program," said Rubio Wednesday. "These are not
mutually exclusive goals."
Here’s where the money is going and a few projects of note.
$63.38 million for clean energy
Majority of PCEF’s annual funding—anywhere from 40 to 60 percent—is
directed toward projects that contribute to a reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions through clean energy transitions. The grants range from $232,056
to nearly $10 million and are anticipated to reduce or avoid 300,000 metric
tons of carbon dioxide emissions over the projects’ lifetime.
• $1.7 million to Albina Vision Trust for the Albina One affordable housing
project—the construction of 94 units of affordable housing that will mark
the beginning of redevelopment in lower Albina. The PCEF grant will fund
heat pump systems, solar panels, and other energy efficient appliances as
part of the larger project.
• $9.99 million to nonprofit Community Energy Project (CEP), an energy
efficiency-focused nonprofit, to conduct major energy retrofits for 40 to 50
low-income homeowners annually for five years. This project is an
expansion of CEP’s previous PCEF project, which conducted retrofits on 20
Black-owned homes.
• $389,588 to Roots and Beats Project, a bilingual music education
organization, to retrofit an abandoned warehouse to serve as a justice and
arts education center that can double as a heating and cooling space for
unhoused Portlanders during extreme weather events. The grant will fund
solar panels, a heat pump, insulation, LED lighting, and other energy-
related upgrades.
$26.05 million for workforce and contract development
Part of PCEF’s mission is to create more opportunities for low-income
people, Portlanders of color, and other underserved populations within the
clean energy workforce. According to PCEF manager Sam Baraso, this
funding area received the highest level of applications in comparison to its
available funding.
• $1.8 million to youth mentorship nonprofit Leaders Become Legends to
develop a green workforce development program that provides mentorship,
personal development, and clean industry skills to Black and Indigenous
Portlanders, including those who were formerly incarcerated, unhoused, or
impacted by gang or domestic violence. The program intends to train 60 to
80 people over four years.
• $7.2 million to Constructing Hope Pre-Apprenticeship Program, a
nonprofit that teaches construction skills, to train low-income Portlanders
of color and women in construction trades that focus on green energy
projects. Over three years, the project plans to enroll 595 people in training,
graduate 475, and place 400 into employment.
• $355,783 to LatinoBuild, a trade association for Latino contractors, to
provide bi-lingual training and one-on-one mentorship in the green
building industry to Latinx contractors. Over two years, the program plans
to provide technical training to 20 to 32 Latinx contracting businesses.
$10.96 million for renewable agriculture and green infrastructure
Put simply, this project area funds putting green things in the ground.
Restricted to 10 percent of the total funding by PCEF’s rules, just six
projects fall under this category.
• $3.69 million to the Native American Youth and Family Center to convert
4.2 acres of former baseball fields into a diversified farm, plant medicine
garden, community gathering space, and playscape focusing on Indigenous
communal activities and native land cultivation.
• $1.7 million to Black Futures Farm to convert two existing farms into a
net-zero greenhouse gas impact farming system. The farm site will use solar
panels and other regenerative agriculture technologies and be available as a
community demonstration of net-zero farming.
$5.26 million for innovation grants
Innovation grants deal with transportation-related projects or other
climate-related projects that don’t neatly fit into other funding areas.
Transportation emissions account for about 40 percent of Oregon’s
greenhouse gas emissions.
• $20,000 to Bikes for Humanity PDX to provide 100 refurbished bikes and u-
locks to youth in foster care, people experiencing homelessness, and other
marginalized people. The bikes will be distributed by partner organizations
that already work with the target audience.
• $3.52 million to nonprofit Metropolitan Family Service to create electric
vehicle and e-bike incentives and research low-income communities
perceptions about electric vehicles in order to promote adoption of
emission-free modes of transportation.
$1.56 million for planning grants
In its smallest funding pool, PCEF is funding 16 planning grants to build the
foundation of future projects. Generally, organizations that receive a
planning grant are expected to apply for a PCEF grant to implement the
planned project the following year.
• $100,000 to 7 Waters Canoe Family to create plans to acquire land to
restore with native plants, wildlife, and native farming practices.
• $99,082 to the Black Educational Achievement Movement to lay the
groundwork for solar-powered emergency preparedness hubs at three sites
in Northeast and East Portland. The hubs would be sited at Black
community centers.
• $69,478 to disability rights organization Community Vision to find
opportunities for people with disabilities to work in the green industry and
provide training to clean energy employers on how to properly support
employees with disabilities.
$200,000 for mini grants
Mini grants are distributed throughout the year and capped at $5,000 each.
Previous mini grant examples include funding for a solar-powered
generator for the Indigenous Peoples’ Market and sending an organization's
staff to clean energy training.
Council also approved $10 million, or 10 percent of the total grant funding
amount, as contingency funding as directed by PCEF code.
A complete list of all 65 approved grants can be found here.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Body Camera Footage Shows Damon Lamarr Johnson Died While Restrained By Police
Trail Blazers' Head Coach Chauncey Billups Arrested in Connection to Mafia-Backed
Illegal Gambling
Daytime Cooling Centers Reopen In Portland Tuesday Amid Extreme Heat Wave
What to Expect After Trump Threatens to Send Additional Troops to “War Ravaged”
Portland
“A Loss for Society”: Friends and Family Honor “Folk Hero” Mike O’Callaghan, Who Died
Last Month
Supporters Pack Courtroom for Portlander Facing Federal Protest Charges
Editors' Picks
On Longest Night of the Year, Portlanders Remember Homeless Neighbors Who Died in
2022
THE TRASH REPORT: Norms are Dead. Long Live the Norms!
Where to Pick Up Our Fall Arts Guide, and How You Can Help the Mercury Publish Even
MORE Print Issues!
Behind the Project Pabst Unicorn With Matt Slessler
THE TRASH REPORT: "No Thank You" to Many Garbage Men, "Yes Thank You" to the Trash
Pandas
Portland’s Newest Safe Rest Village Will Be the Largest Yet—But Can It Transition
Houseless Residents Into Permanent Housing?
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286