'Clean Energy' and Dirty Politics
The Golden Goose lays a rotten egg.
RICHARD CHEVERTON
JUL 10, 2022
7 9 Sh
We have often used the term, “open kimono” to highlight an inadvertent disclosure
the progressive machineʼs inner workings. Itʼs the stuff that usual comes in a footno
in some policy paper or buried in the blah-blah of a “progress report.”
Today, we present a bare-nekkid example of the way things really work in Portland.
Hereʼs the way the Tribune kicked it off…
Reforms pave way for clean energy grants
Work is well under way to resolve questions raised by a city audit ahead of a City
Council vote on $111 million in Portland Clean Energy Benefits Fund grant
requests...
That “work” came down to a report from the cityʼs auditor that, stripped of the usua
City Hall double-talk, said the people playing with the money on a nine-member
committee supervising the fund—none of them elected—had no way of really know
whether or not any of its grants were working. Or, for that matter, being skimmed.
The committee and the fund are the result of just one of the silly ballot measures
approved by the cityʼs nutty voters; a measure which was, in the Tribʼs shorthand…
…drafted by a coalition of minority, environmental, social justice and faith-based
organizations. It was approved at the November 2018 election and imposes a 1%
surcharge on retailers with annual sales of $1 billion or more in the US and
$500,000 or more within Portland.
Short version: Hey! Itʼs just pin money to Home Depot or Starbucks or Apple or
Walmart (but not Amazon, of course) so letʼs rip ‘em off.
The first tranche went out last year at $8.6 million, and triggered a hit-job in the
Oregonian—which in turn triggered the city audit. The Oregonianʼs latest story mad
sure to offer itself a big pat on the back…
The proposal…comes six months after the city rescinded a five-year $12 million
grant from this same fund to nonprofit Diversifying Energy following an
Oregonian/OregonLive investigation that documented its leaderʼs extensive histo
of financial misdeeds and unpaid taxes.
…which, as we pointed out at the time, missed the point of the actual scandal entire
No surprise: they missed it again.
So: what is it?
Letʼs count the ways.
Itʼs flat-out racist. And courts in some places donʼt think thatʼs very nic
The city steps up to the plate, in its own document, and says the fund is…
…the first ever climate fund in the U.S. that is created by and led by people of co
It is tasked with reducing carbon emissions while ensuring the benefits of those
reductions materialize for frontline communities who have been historically
excluded. It remains an understatement to say that PCEF is groundbreaking.
And how!
That a city would get away with printing such a challenge to any self-respecting
constitutional rights attorney is a testament to our supine local legal beagles. The c
document is loaded with “whites need not apply” verbiage, such as…
Within the recommended portfolio there is robust representation of culturally
specific groups implementing projects that provide a multitude of benefits to all
PCEFʼs priority populations.
Which the Oregonian neatly summarized as…
The fund is also meant to prioritize people of color and other historically
marginalized communities.
Not that any local media would note that the whole give-away is under the thumb o
Carmen Rubio, a Latinx (or whatever you want to call it), who rose from the ranks of
the Latino Network to city council. Which is now disproportionally made up of POCs
Nor is there any metric for when those “historical” sins will be paid off. Our best gue
never.
In addition, thereʼs no mention of racial groups getting in on this historic score-sett
and “underserved” nonsense who really donʼt look much like the long-term
oppresseds. For example…
The Immigrant and Refugee Community Organization ($1,418,922), for someth
listed as the Bottling Blocks Related Northwest project, which will benefit an
apartment complex the organization is building;
Rohingya Youth Association of Portland ($232,056), for the Rohingya and Som
home weatherization project;
The Ethiopian and Eritrean Cultural and Resource Center, which got $100,000 t
“enhance environmental knowledge and awareness among the Ethiopian and
Eritrean community in Portland.”
It would take an Excel genius to find any actual money being spent on…yʼknow, cert
disfavored races. A few looked promising at first…
De Rose Community Bridge and Holistic Wellness, which got an astonishing
$1,061,922 to run a 1-2 acre garden “on which project participants will conduct
regenerative agricultural educational programming.” Our hopes were dashed
when they added that it will be “led by African immigrants and focused on
educating and benefiting African women.”
The Community Cycling Center got $499,419 but—no dice—it will “give away 6
bikes, fund 14,000 hours of staff time and provide stipends and logistical suppo
to Black and Latinx community leaders”
Leaf through the not-very-informative list of grants and you (or a federal judge) mig
start wondering about that “groundbreaking” set of criteria for grants. And thatʼs a
no, although Oregon likes to believe that the 14th amendment, along with the civil
right law of 1964, stops at the state line.
It might have interested the programʼs list of backers—more on them in a moment—
take note of a national injunction handed down in 2021 in a federal case, Faust v
Vilsack, which stopped the Department of Agriculture…
…from implementing a loan-forgiveness program for farmers and ranchers unde
Section 1005 of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARPA). Plaintiffs assert t
Section 1005 denies them equal protection of the law because eligibility to
participate in the program is based solely on racial classifications.
Thereʼs a legal test for anything that stinks of racial preference, as outlined by the
court…
First, the policy must target a specific episode of past discrimination. It cannot re
on a generalized assertion that there has been past discrimination…
Second, there must be evidence of intentional discrimination in the past.
Statistical disparities don't cut it, although they may be used as evidence to
establish intentional discrimination....
Third, the government must have had a hand in the past discrimination it now se
to remedy.
Kinda tough to prove that with Somalis, Eritreans and Rohingya getting big bucks. N
to mention our recent friends from south of the border—all here, one assumes,
because they wanted to be in these systemically racist United States.
Nor did anyone point out yet another 2021 ruling, this one against the Biden
administration…
…a federal court in Texas ruled that the race-based parts of the law governing re
to restaurant owners are unconstitutional. Last week a higher federal court, the
Sixth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals, ruled the same way.
The law establishes a three week “priority period” in which only applicants from
certain racial and ethnic backgrounds can request relief.
Think there are any rogue local lawyers who will step up to the plate? And forego
billing any of the well-fed non-profits and their allies ?
Which brings us to…
Itʼs self-dealing at grotesque levels, even for Portland
Letʼs go back to those placid days of 2018, when the whole idea of the “soak the
multinationals” tax was dreamed up. Hereʼs a web site that will, essentially, give you
30-thousand-foot view of the non-profit ecosystem, which is the only growth indus
beyond bureaucracy, in Portland.
There were, by my count, 130 non-profits lined up behind the measure. Every
progressive machine pol, from our distant US Senator Merkley to the sainted Bud
Clark, signed on, as well as most of the cityʼs neighborhood associations and many
religious leaders, along with oddball endorsers such as Hot Lips Pizza and Los May
Taqueria.
It was kinda odd that Home Depot and Apple and Walmart werenʼt on the list,
considering that they were the vehicles for passing the tax along to the mopes who
were going to vote for it. But then, as we said, to them itʼs just a rounding error—and
hint that they really ought to be expanding in Happy Valley.
So, letʼs take a look at some of the measureʼs backers who will hit the jackpot…
Street Roots, which purports to help the general (and ever-growing) homeless
population, which is getting $1,171,087 not for tenters but to retrofit their own
building;
Central City Concern, our cityʼs biggest low-rent operator of neo-flophouses, w
got an unbelievable $5,525,750 on something called “PCEF CCC Large
Application 2021.” Which is for, essentially, air conditioning their properties in O
Town.
Hacienda CDC, which mines the various lodes of federal and state money, tax
gimmicks, and cut-outs with non-profits to build “affordable” apartments. They
raked in a heart-stopping $9,400,000, to “provide cleaner air, increased comfo
better health, reduced financial burden and improved social outcomes for 1000
Portland residents through upgrades to six multifamily communities with a tota
243 units. Approximately 92% of the residents are people of color and all are lo
income.” How much Hacienda will save in annual operating costs is not
mentioned.
Proudground, which gets three grants for a total of $3,081,217. One grant will
“cover the full cost of solar installation for 15 homes owned by low-income peo
and people of color and is a continuation of an existing program which has alre
installed 26 PV systems.”
Verde, which gets $4,690,070 for a couple of projects: “…a 1.2 MW community
solar project serving low-income households, and a 60 kW solar array and
electrification and cooling infrastructure at Dignity Village. The community sola
project will be located on Port of Portland property and plans to serve up to 150
low-income Indigenous, Black, and Brown households in the Cully neighborhoo
Service Employees InternationalUnion (SEIU) Local 49, our old friends in the
public employee sector, picked up $500,000 “to expand the Green Jobs
Education Program… that engages frontline communities in reducing carbon
emissions in commercial office buildings.” For the half-million, SEIU says it will
train 150 green warrior janitors over three years.
These arenʼt the only groups that lobbied for the measure in 2018 that cashed in. H
are a few others…
Community Energy project, $9,999,378
Portland Community Reinvestment Initiatives Inc., $1,186,730
ROSE Community Development, $499,000…
The list goes on…but you get the idea.
Many projects donʼt actually reduce dreaded CO2, although the committee came u
with a mystery number—300-thousand tons of CO2 removed from the atmosphere
yearly—although it is hard to see how the many training and indoctrination program
being funded will contribute to that goal, unless they find people who do not exhale
few examples…
Constructing Hope Pre-Apprenticeship Program ($7,200,000), to “assist low-
income people of color and women to move into careers in skilled construction
trades that work on clean energy and green construction projects.” The project
vows to place 400 people “from PCEFʼs priority population” into green jobs.
Leaders Become Legends ($1,849,873), for “Increasing access to Green Jobs f
Black, Brown and Indigenous Portlanders.”
Ecotrust ($2,038,051) which is a “a project of the Green Workforce Collaborativ
which is a partnerhip aimed at addressing economic injustice through green job
training.” They promise to graduate “a total of 36 cohort members annually.”
Urban League of Portland ($2,971,156). The wheeler-dealers in local “affordabl
housing will branch out to “recruit, train, and coach…100 jobseekers and 40 sm
business owners annually.” Note: none of them are guaranteed jobs—or profits.
In all, there are 12 “workforce” grants, totaling $26.5-million.
This is not chump-change.
The rest of the “clean energy” grants are for solar panels and heat pumps and othe
“green tech” gadgets, in a market that would probably disappear without heavy
government sudsidies.
Yes, those solar panels—made in China—will have an impact, although Portland doe
occasionally have a cloudy day, and winter nights tend to be rather lengthy.
And—yah—there are batteries to store that solar energy, although they run out after
four hours.
And all those heat pumps? Hereʼs what Carrier, which makes and sells the expensiv
devices, says…
Because of how they work, heat pumps produce less heat than furnaces and wo
best in warmer climates (zones 1-3 on the U.S. Department of Energy climate zo
map.
Home guru Bib Vila adds…
…if youʼre in zones 4 through 7, a furnace will probably be your best bet.
Portland is right on the border between Zones 4-5.
If you live in one of Haciendaʼs “affordables,” when they install heat pumps they mig
want to issue warm cardigans as well.
Which brings us to our final point…
Whoʼs making those multi-million dollar decisions?
Itʼs the old Portland story. Progressive pols and self-interested groups come up wit
bright idea—always involving someone elseʼs money. The irony of non-profits, whic
are happily tax-exempt, dipping into the taxpayersʼ pockets is lost on pols and med
types.
Then, once the idea is sold to the credulous voters, appoint an unelected “voluntee
committee to dole out the dough. Expect no media surveillance. Reporters really do
understand anything about Climate Change. Nor do most voters.
Weʼve seen this in the city and county charter commissions—but give the Climate
Change committee credit: none of their members are in high school.
Otherwise, they are the usual mix oftrue believers and utopians and do well by doin
good types. Iʼll bet you havenʼt heard of any of them. Letʼs wander among the
resumes...
Shanice Brittany Clarke, who is Director of Community Engagement at Portland
Public Schools. Sheʼs credited in her official blurb, with having “worked directly
with 75-100 community organizations annually.” Might one ask: was she sharin
inside information with any of them?
Faith Graham, “director of the Network for Energy, Water, and Health in Afforda
Buildings, a national social impact and learning network at the intersection of
affordable housing and energy efficiency.”
Michael Edden David Hill, “who, in addition to experience in wind power design
and deployment, also has expertise in construction management on one of the
largest solar photo voltaic systems in the country.”
Dr. Megan Horstis an Assistant Professor in the school of Urban Studies &
Planning at Portland State University. She “brings a strong equity lens and
experience in food justice work.” Would someone please define, “food justice?”
Jeffrey Moreland Jr., the head of Raimore Construction LLC, “that contracts he
civil construction projects in the Portland Metropolitan area.” He responded to
application question thusly: “This potentially presents a direct conflict of intere
which could in theory result in a financial benefit of more than $500 annually.” H
was appointed anyway by former (and now deceased) City Councilor Nick Fish
Maria Gabrielle Sipin, “a professional transportation planner and community he
advocate.” She graduated from PSU in 2018 and slipped directly into non-
profitland. The university highlighten her “report on OHSUʼs vision for diversity
and inclusion and their goals to reduce single-occupancy vehicle trips...”
Amanda Squiemphen-Yazzie is “an enrolled member of the Confederated Tribe
of Warm Springs.” It might be worth mentioning that Native American groups w
some of the biggest winners in the committeeʼs money-dump: the Native
American Youth and Family Center got $5,498,885 for two projects; Oregon
Native American Chamber got $778,496 for “workforce development;” Affiliate
Tribes of Northwest Indians got $3,778,496 for training; Portland All Nations
Canoe Family got $2,320,814 “to create a replicable ‘toolkitʼ that would assess
mitigate, restore, conserve, and protect land and watersheds…through Indigen
Traditional Ecological and Cultural Knowledge.”
Ranfis Villatoro, “the Oregon State Coordinator for the Bluegreen Alliance,” whi
“unites labor unions and environmental organizations to solve todayʼs
environmental challenges.”
Robin Wang,“a seasoned business, nonprofit, and community leader with a
passion for deploying capital and harnessing business to benefit the greater
good.” His LinkedIn profile shows a spotty record of short-term positions in
various “start ups,” such as “Oregon Consumer Justice,” where he was “Interim
Executive Director and Interim Chief Financial Officer.”
All insiders, most with potentially worrisome conflicts of interest, all true believers in
the climate apocalypse, all monetizing climate change for all itʼs worth.
Notably absent: advocates for taxpayers; a bona-fide climate scientist; a skeptic.
Theyʼre unelected—more than one nominated by either a dead or defeated city
councilperson. Theyʼre untouchable; most have never been quoted in a newspaper
on TV.
Itʼs an unholy alliance between the construction/development gang—an industry rife
with shady players, the lightly-regulated non-profit world, and the political machine
where money is the motherʼs milk.
Itʼs a game of mutual back-scratching. Of who, not what, you know.
Take a look at the various mind-bending sums being doled out and youʼll see a reci
for insider-deals, blatant political patronage, even kickbacks and outright pocket-
stuffing.
Itʼs a lethal combination that regularly becomes a scandal. In fact, the Committee h
had one already, thanks to the Oregonian.
Letʼs remember who was left out of this mad give-away—on purpose.
As a member of that group, allow me to ask:
Where the hell is my free air-conditioner?
Subscribe to Portland Dissent
Let's save a great American city.
Type your email... Subscribe
By subscribing, I agree toSubstack'sTerms of Use, and
acknowledge itsInformation Collection NoticeandPrivacy Policy.
7 Likes
Previous Next
Discussion about this post
Comments Restacks
Write a comment...
Joshua Marquis Jul 12, 2022
Liked by Richard Cheverton, Pamela Fitzsimmons
I am a lawyer, but with none of the particular skillset to sue what sounds like should be "ducks
barrel" cases. But I can tell you that a large part would depend on which of the small number
District Court in Oregon judges you drew, if such a lawsuit were filed. At least two would give
hearing, some of the others less assuredly so.
This all sounds very much like the late Tom Wolfe's story about guilt money being handed ove
the Black Panthers 50 years ago in NYC in his wonderful collection "Mau -Mauing the Flak
Catchers."
As you say, to earmark millions of dollars and say people have to be of a specific ethnicity or s
color sounds...irredeemably racist and illegal. That's very different than addressing a specific
injustice, if for example a plaintiff can show that Blacks were systematically excluded from cer
job by a particular government entity, they should - and can - recover damages for an injustic
suffered because of clear racial bias.
What is even scarier is that people handing out - OUR - tax money are rarely elected officials
this hodgepodge of self-appointed groups, about which we know nothing, and many of which
vanishwithouteverfilinganydocumentswiththefederalgovernment asrequiredforSection
LIKE (2) REPLY
1 reply by Richard Cheverton
Larry Jul 12, 2022 Edited
Liked by Richard Cheverton, Pamela Fitzsimmons
David Brinkley toward the end of his best last days used to give a cynical knowing chuckle wh
recounting political antics in D.C. Cookie Roberts could touch on wry knowingness, too. After
old man got his feet wet fighting the Kingfish's outfit. Those chuckles or flashes of bitter hum
were enough at times to let you know that some informed and intelligent people hadn't lost th
A comprehensive catastrophe is gathering. The blithe confidence of all the best people no lon
disgusts but terrifies me. People are ruined for alluding to the truth. This goes on long enough
good people will shut you down and you'll be glad to be let off with keeping your mouths shut
I'm religious for a reason.
LIKE (2) REPLY
7 more comments...
© 2026Richard Cheverton, Pamela Fitzsimmons · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substackis the home for great culture