Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Apr 4, 2022 at 10:01 am
The Risks and Rewards of Portland’s Clean
Energy Fund
How can a program that’s designed to break the mold of exclusionary bureaucratic city programs exist
within a traditional oversight system?
ISABELLA GARCIA
Hands planting seeds in the ground
PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY FUND
For the past 40 years, the Community Energy Project (CEP) has helped low-
income Portland homeowners make energy-saving adjustments to their
homes for free. The organization has often leveraged funding from the city’s
housing bureau or the Oregon Department of Energy to do targeted repairs,
like upgrading a home’s thermostat or water heater to save on energy
consumption. But cost limitations had kept CEP from performing energy-
saving retrofits on entire homes—a service that could have a lasting impact
on their client’s lives and the environment.
That is, until the city created the Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF). In
2021, CEP received an $800,000 grant from PCEF that would allow their
team to perform full home retrofits on 20 homes owned by low-income,
Black Portlanders in the Albina neighborhood. The upgrades, which will be
completed by June, are expected to reduce each home’s energy
consumption by an average of 55 percent and lower the homeowner’s utility
bills by 38 percent.
“The beauty of PCEF is being able to create and dream up [solutions for]
where the funding gaps have been,” said Charity Fain, executive director of
CEP. “We're able to just do so much more in a home.”
Colloquially known as Portland’s version of the federal Green New Deal,
PCEF aims to hold major retailers like Walmart or Target operating in
Portland accountable for their carbon emissions by charging them a 1
percent business license surcharge. That money is then redistributed to
community organizations for green energy projects that reduce carbon
emissions, create renewable energy jobs, and benefit low-income
communities and people of color who have the least access to resources
that mitigate climate change and disproportionately suffer from the effects
of climate change. It's the only known program in the nation that combines
this funding model with climate and social equity goals.
“We have people that are going from oil heat tanks to heat pumps—entire
levels of technologies passed them by,” Fain said of CEP’s work. “They have
been left behind for a long time if they’re still on oil. So we're leapfrogging
over a couple levels of technology where no one tried to reach them.”
The community organizations that created PCEF set out to remove barriers
to energy-related funding that have historically kept low-income people
and people of color from accessing those benefits. For example, the
nonprofit Energy Trust of Oregon has provided monetary incentives for
energy efficiency upgrades to Oregonians since 2002, offering discounts on
floor insulation or window upgrades that help people save on their heating
and cooling bills. However, those discounts are made available through
reimbursements, meaning that they are only attainable for people who have
enough money to pay for the upgrade upfront. Those people are usually
homeowners, who are disproportionately white.
PCEF hopes to change those outcomes by prioritizing grant projects that
are led by diverse organizations, providing training on how to apply for
grants to help less experienced applicants, and funding clean energy and
workforce development projects that specifically benefit “priority
communities” including Black, Indigenous, and low-income Portlanders.
The projects PCEF funds are usually direct community investments, like
creating carbon-sequestering greenspaces, or providing services for free,
like CEP’s work.
After spending three years hiring staff and fleshing out its structure, the city
program is still in its early stages—PCEF’s grant committee distributed its
first round of grants totaling $8.6 million to 45 organizations in April 2021
and expects to give out $100 million in grants this year.
But, as the program forges a new path of climate justice and racial equity in
Portland, PCEF staff and its founders feel the program is being judged by
expectations created for more traditional energy programs that operate
through reimbursements instead of upfront community investments. By
those metrics, PCEF’s model of giving out millions of dollars to community-
based organizations could be interpreted as risky, prompting the question:
How can a program that’s designed to break the mold of exclusionary
bureaucratic city programs exist within a traditional oversight system?
Bucking Tradition
In early March, the City Auditor’s Office released a report on PCEF’s
management structure. According to City Auditor Mary Hull Caballero, the
auditor’s office normally waits until a program has been up and running for
at least a few years before evaluating the program. However, because PCEF
was created by a community-written ballot measure and assigned to a city
bureau instead of being developed by a bureau itself, Hull Caballero viewed
the program as high risk, warranting an earlier audit.
The PCEF audit centers on the program’s management structure and
oversight as defined by the ballot measure, pointing to a need for greater
clarity on the exact role of the program’s volunteer grant committee, setting
data-driven performance goals, and updating PCEF’s climate goals in city
code to align with the city’s own emergency climate declaration that was
adopted following the PCEF ballot measure.
Director of Audit Services KC Jones said that the audit’s recommendations
are typical for a new program.
“With a new program with a unique setup, [the recommendations are] the
sort of stuff that might not jump out to them as something exciting to put
in place,” Jones said. “It's more interesting to give out grants to interesting
programs that you think are going to help people. It's not as exciting to say,
‘This is how our reporting structure is going to work.’”
The audit pointed out concerns that PCEF staff say they were already aware
of, but simply addressing in a novel way.
For example, PCEF aims to reduce carbon emissions and increase energy
efficiency through its projects, but does not specify the exact metric tons of
carbon or number of kilowatt hours of energy it hopes to reduce over a
certain time period. There are several hurdles to achieving those metrics,
such as the city not having a database on how many Portland homes
require minimal energy retrofits like small technology upgrades or how
many need major retrofits like roof weatherization and heating system
overhauls, and because PCEF is a first-of-its-kind program, there are no
other comparable programs in the country that staff can look to for
guidance.
To address the lack of these specifics, PCEF staff instead decided to use an
“adaptive management” system where the program would use research
gathered during the initial grant cycle to then develop specific emission
reduction targets for future years. Yet, the audit labels the lack of standard
metrics as a major risk that should be addressed more quickly. In response
to the audit, PCEF staff and its volunteer grant committee said they will
work to more clearly define its performance metrics by July 2022 and set
concrete emissions reduction goals in 2023, as well as assess the program’s
governance structure and budget requirements over the next year and a
half.
“Given PCEF’s origins as a community-led initiative, we have maintained a
meticulous dedication to implementing the program as defined in the
ballot language,” reads a letter from Commissioner Carmen Rubio, who
oversees PCEF, and PCEF staff in response to the audit. “However, no
ground-breaking program is perfect out of the gate, and we agree with the
recommendations in the audit.”
While PCEF staff welcomed the recommendations of the final audit, they
were more critical of the audit’s initial draft, which they were shown last
year.
"... no ground-breaking program is perfect out of the gate..." — City
Commissioner Carmen Rubio
The first iteration of the audit was ready in summer 2021 and sent to PCEF
staff for review and response prior to publication—a standard practice for
the auditor’s office which operates under a “no surprises” policy. According
to audit documents obtained by the Mercury through a records request,
PCEF staff said the first draft of the audit unfairly judged the emerging
program against metrics that were used to evaluate fully established
programs and misrepresented the progress of the program by not including
proper context.
For example, the audit critiqued PCEF’s investment in a grant recipient’s
“capacity building,” or an organization’s ability to successfully implement
their program by increasing staffing, training, and more. The first version of
the audit stated that “capacity building may divert money from projects.”
PCEF Program Manager Sam Baraso argued that capacity building was an
essential part of their investments, because PCEF is typically working with
less experienced organizations that may need help to scale up.
“There is continual lack of recognition that capacity building is an essential
component of all types of new/innovate [sic] programming,” Baraso wrote
in response to the first draft. “If we ask a builder to build a house for us,
should we criticize them for buying hammers?”
The audit was rewritten after receiving feedback from PCEF staff.
The final audit tailored this suggestion to say that the “program needs
clarity on capacity building,” noting that PCEF lacks specific language on
how capacity building should be implemented.
While the factual findings of the final audit remained the same as the first,
the final version of the audit was less critical of the program and removed a
recommendation that PCEF pause its grant distribution until it clearly
defined its performance metrics. Hull Caballero said the recommendation
to pause grant giving was removed after the audit team reviewed some of
the subjective assumptions they made about the program—assumptions
that were informed by the way city programs usually work.
“To tell a program that is authorized by a voter-approved piece of
legislation to stop, once we reassessed our assumptions, that was no longer
an appropriate recommendation for us to be making,” Hull Caballero said.
“Council can make that decision, the volunteer board can make that
decision, but it was not at that point appropriate for us to make that
decision because that is a policy choice.”
In an interview with the Mercury, Baraso emphasized PCEF’s agreement
with the final audit recommendations, but also spoke more broadly about
the struggle of trying to maintain the intention of the program while
existing within a traditional oversight system that is accustomed to the
status quo.
“When you go into our origin story and what we were designed to do, it
inherently means not following the exact playbook that has been taken by
other programs and exploring what it means to invest in community in a
different way so that we are able to benefit those communities that have
not historically benefited,” Baraso said. “It inherently means doing
something differently, and yet all of those critiques are pushing us to do
those exact same things.”
Inequitable Growing Pains
Both the city auditor and program staff compare PCEF to a start-up
company. According to Hull Caballero, it usually takes two to four years
before a city program is considered fully established. PCEF is only just
entering its second year of grant distribution.
To Baraso and other PCEF supporters, the program has established a strong
foundation that it will continue to improve upon as it operates through its
early stages. PCEF supporters also argue that the program, which has
always been clear on its mission to break tradition in an effort to bring
more equity to the green energy field, is now being criticized for breaking
tradition. In some ways, the auditors see that too.
“They're actually doing what the legislation suggests they do, which is to go
do something quite different, and now there's many large reactions to
what's happening,” Hull Caballero said.
Breaking tradition isn’t appealing for those invested in the status quo.
Following the release of the final audit, the Portland Business Alliance
(PBA)—a lobbying group representing more than one hundred Portland
businesses—issued a statement calling for a freeze on the $100 million in
grant funding PCEF plans to distribute this year and an independent
investigation into the program’s management and oversight. The statement
claimed that PCEF’s “mismanagement of historic amounts of funding is
precisely why the City’s credibility with voters is at an all-time low.”
Hull Caballero said the PBA overstated the findings of the audit in its
statement. A PBA representative declined an interview with the Mercury,
stating that their position had already been laid out in their statement on
the audit.
The statement didn’t come as a shock to PCEF staff and supporters—PBA
campaigned against PCEF as a ballot measure, claiming that the cost of the
business tax would be passed on to consumers. Marcus Mundy, the
executive director of Coalition of Communities of Color which campaigned
in support of PCEF, sees PBA’s opposition to the program as large
businesses being unwilling to accept responsibility for contributing to
climate change through their business practices.
“The PBA is driven by its membership, and some of the PBA’s large
members don't want to pay this tax,” said Mundy. “So, of the thousands of
rules and administrative laws in Portland, they focused on [PCEF] just
because the money is focused on things they don’t want to particularly own
as being responsible for regionally, which is addressing some climate
change and energy-related issues and redressing some contracting issues
with communities of color. That’s not something they are comfortable living
with on a day-to-day basis.”
Portland City Commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty, who played an instrumental
role in advancing PCEF from a ballot measure to city code, also saw the
statement as PBA’s members trying to shirk responsibility.
“For [PBA] to use the first ever audit of a new program to call for repeal just
reinforces that this is an idea they never supported,” Hardesty said in a
statement. “They are trying to prevent our wealthiest corporations from
contributing just a small portion of their profits to invest in the self
determination of BIPOC communities and to create new green jobs.”
A recent opinion from the Oregonian Editorial Board echoed the PBA’s call
for PCEF to pause its grant giving process until the audit recommendations
are in place. The president of the Oregonian Media Group serves as the chair
of the PBA’s board of directors.
“Executing such a flawed program with a stunning amount of new tax
money to give away is a recipe for abject failure,” the editorial board wrote.
The editorial board specifically singled out a PCEF grant awarded to SEIU
Local 49, a workers union representing over 15,000 Oregonians. SEIU Local
49 was awarded $148,373 in 2021 to establish a Green Janitor Education
Program in Portland and train 50 janitors. The program was originally
developed in Los Angeles in 2014 and offers a 30-hour training on green
cleaning practices, water and waste reduction, and workplace health and
safety. In Los Angeles, buildings whose custodial staff participated in the
training reduced their energy use by an average 5.6 percent and about 80
percent of training participants reported implementing some of the energy
saving techniques they learned in their own homes.
The Oregonian Editorial Board called the SEIU Local 49 project a
“bewildering grant,” implying that the program did not have clear climate
impacts or metrics that would track success. The union has pushed back on
this critique.
“Sometimes when folks picture investments in transitioning to a new green
economy, they picture flashy equipment purchases,” said Scott
Cheesewright, an organizer with SEIU Local 49 who oversees the program,
“not something that is simple and effective, like investing in frontline
communities who are—like janitors—immigrants, people of color, working
class people with low incomes and investing in workplace development to
recruit folks in the jobs they already have to promote energy efficiency.”
Cheesewright believes the Green Janitor Education Program is exactly the
kind of project PCEF was created to support, noting that the first training
session served 22 janitors who were originally from 13 different countries
and was conducted in four different languages.
To Baraso, the PBA statement and criticism of the Green Janitor Education
Program are another in a long line of finger-wagging from PCEF critics.
“There's always been this undertone that this ballot measure designed and
led by majority community of color groups—and then subsequently
implemented by a majority people of color group within the city to benefit
majority people of color and low income folks—is getting this underlying
critique or undertone of ‘They don't know what they're doing,’ which at its
core feels very racist,” Baraso, who is Black, said.
Over the past year, PCEF has been questioned on not moving money out
the door fast enough. In October 2021, the program’s funding reached $169
million while approximately $9 million had been distributed to
organizations for clean energy projects. PCEF staff attributed the large
amount of money in its coffers to the fact that PCEF started collecting on
the surcharge before it had a system in place to distribute the money, and it
intentionally distributed a smaller amount of money its first year as a way
to work out the kinks of its grant evaluation process.
Mundy said this was a responsible decision on PCEF’s part.
“[The funds are] not just sitting there,” Mundy said. “It's earmarked for the
things that the measure was meant to address. They are doling it out
appropriately with proper scrutiny and oversight.”
PCEF has also been questioned when it does execute grant funding. In
December, an Oregonian investigation revealed that PCEF awarded a $11.5
million grant to an energy nonprofit whose executive director had a history
of financial crimes. Diversifying Energy, led by Linda Woodley, was chosen
to coordinate the purchase of 15,000 heat pumps and cooling units to be
distributed to vulnerable Portlanders to mitigate the impacts of future
heatwaves. The Oregonian discovered that Woodley may have fabricated
her previous work experience and had previously spent time in prison for
fraud. PCEF staff could not verify some of Woodley’s previous work
experience and City Council moved to revoke the grant at the
recommendation of program staff.
Woodley sued the city in early March, alleging that PCEF staff did not give
her enough time to provide contact information for the people who could
verify her work experience and that the city destroyed her career by
stripping her organization of the grant.
Following the incident, PCEF staff developed an additional risk assessment
system for grant applicants that will require additional work references and
risk mitigation processes for organizations with less experience or who
pitch projects that are larger than they have worked on before.
According to the city auditor, the public saga is a perfect example of how
the risk of innovation conflicts with traditional government processes.
Risk vs Reward
Because PCEF intends to partner with organizations that have been
historically excluded from the green energy sector, the program
intentionally did not include background checks in its grant review process.
People of color are disproportionately represented in the criminal justice
system and previous convictions often restrict someone’s career and
business opportunities.
Hull Caballero sees PCEF’s commitment to not check grantees’
backgrounds as a risk factor.
“That's where the innovative program and a different way of looking at
things is bumping up against the traditional way that the government likes
to work,” Hull Caballero said. “They were willing to take a big risk by not
looking at the backgrounds of their grantees so what happened [with
Woodley] could happen and they seem to be okay with that. You can tell by
the reaction of the Council that Council has a much lower risk tolerance.”
Hull Caballero believes that in order to find a comparable middle ground,
PCEF will need to become more conservative with its risks while City
Council will have to become more tolerant of risk in order to achieve the
program’s goals.
“That's where the innovative program and a different way of looking at things
is bumping up against the traditional way that the government likes to
work." — City Auditor Mary Hull Caballero
To Fain of Community Energy Project (CEP), nothing about the program
feels risky and, as a grantee, the reporting and accountability requirements
are comparable to the processes used by traditional grant programs. CEP’s
PCEF grant proposal was 30 pages long and took multiple CEP staff
members several weeks to gather all of the information, data, and
projections required for the application. PCEF’s quarterly reporting
requirement is also typical within the industry, according to Fain.
The key differences Fain sees within PCEF are the high levels of
collaboration PCEF staff have maintained throughout the program’s
development, ranging from requesting feedback on the grant application
process to make it clearer, to the way PCEF asks for community-generated
grant ideas as opposed to presenting government projects and asking
organizations to bid for it. It’s something she wants to see adopted by other
funding agencies.
“A lot of times, even with the best of intentions, the [traditional] stakeholder
process is someone at the government level or foundation level who's
created a program, and it’s cooked,” Fain said. “Then they bring it to a
community and they kind of ask for your feedback and maybe they do
something with it. Often they don’t. It's often a box to tick to say you had
community involvement. [PCEF] is not like that, it has literally been
community involvement at every step along the way.”
Fain was heartened to see that feedback CEP provided after the first
application cycle was incorporated in the second grant application cycle
this year. To Fain, the inclusion of community feedback, like how to clarify
language in the application, is evidence that PCEF staff care about lowering
barriers to get investments into the community—something that Fain
believes is missing from the conversation around PCEF.
“There are goals around greenhouse gas reductions and absolutely that is
what our work is centered on, but we can't forget the people and the lived
experience of the person in that house,” Fain said about CEP’s energy
upgrade work. “It goes beyond just the greenhouse gas savings. What
impact does it make for the complete community to see this kind of
change? What are those non-energy benefits, like health benefits? Asthma
goes down, ER visits go down.”
In moments where traditional oversight systems seem to conflict with
PCEF’s mission, Baraso says it’s the program staff’s job to find a solution
that doesn’t compromise the intention of the program.
According to Baraso, the new risk assessment process for grant applicants
prompted by Woodley’s case is not intended to weed out inexperienced
organizations, but rather “right-size” the grant projects to the grant
applicants' experience level and set them—and PCEF—up for success. The
compromise requires PCEF staff and grant committee to do a bit more
“hand holding” than a traditional grant program, but it maintains the
program’s intention of investing in groups that are historically
underrepresented in the green energy field while satisfying City Council’s
call for more in-depth grant evaluation.
Baraso believes that, eventually, the success of PCEF’s projects will speak
for themselves. In the meantime, Baraso hopes people stop conflating the
program’s deviations from the norm with failure.
“It's when we've retrofitted all these homes of low-income Black
homeowners and have preserved their ability to stay in those
neighborhoods and help them reduce their bills and help them have an
asset that they can pass onto the next generation,” Baraso said about the
program’s future success. “It's when we planted trees in a heat island area
and, in some years down the road, helping keep that area cooler as those
trees mature. It's making sure that we have the space in the meanwhile to
implement the program in the will of the voters.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Update: Oregon Calls For New Hearing After Appeals Court Rules National Guard Can
Deploy to Portland
Palestine Supporters Walk Out of Regina Spektor’s Portland Show
TriMet Announces Major Service Cuts Starting This Fall
Despite State Transportation Funding Crisis, Construction Begins on I-5 Rose Quarter
Project
Portland Budget Tweak Causes Heated Discussion on Homelessness
Portlanders Say "Yes" to Parks Levy in Early Special Election Results
Editors' Picks
THE BLACK BYLINE: I’ve Never Joined the Naked Bike Ride—But I Won’t Hate on It
City Council Formulates New Public Camping Rules For the Unhoused; Gonzalez’s Plan
Rejected
The Mercury's 2024 Queer Guide: Endless Queer Summer
Why I (Still) Love Portland
Sassy-Ass Local Trivia About Weirdo Portland History, Another Award for Dame, and
Sorry, Oregon Counties! Idaho DOESN'T WANT YOU. 😭
The Portland Mercury's 2023 Queer Guide: Pride Is Forever Now
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286