Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 11, 2022 at 2:11 pm
APANO Director Duncan Hwang Appointed to
Metro Council
ISABELLA GARCIA
Metro Council appointed Duncan Hwang, co-director of the Asian Pacific
American Network of Oregon (APANO), to the council’s vacant seat
Tuesday.
Hwang is filling the District 6 seat previously occupied by Bob Stacey, who
resigned from his position midterm amid growing health issues. Stacey’s
seat, which covers a significant portion of south Portland, has been vacant
since October 15. Hwang will serve in the position until January 2023.
“It is my great honor to accept this appointment and immediately begin
work serving my constituents at our regional government,” Hwang said in a
press release. “Our region urgently needs solutions to address our
overlapping crisis of homelessness, affordable housing and climate action,
and I’m eager to work with Metro to prioritize the immediate action our
region deserves.”
In addition to directing APANO for eight years, Hwang has served on both
Metro and City of Portland affordable housing committees. Hwang was also
involved in the creation of the Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF), an eco-
energy fund run by and for communities of color who are most impacted by
climate change, and recent safety investments in 82nd Avenue.
Over a dozen public officials including Portland City Commissioner Jo Ann
Hardesty, Multnomah County Chair Deborah Kafoury, and Oregon
Representative Khanh Pham endorsed Hwang for the role. Hardesty cited
Hwang’s existing community relationships and experience as one of the
reasons for her endorsement.
“[Hwang is] already embedded in east Portland, which is a community that
has lacked representation on a political level for way too long,” Hardesty
said. “I have had the privilege of working with Duncan over a lot of issues
since 2013. I have found him to be a very thoughtful and courageous leader.”
Coalition of Communities of Color Executive Director Marcus Mundy
commented in support of Hwang ahead of the vote, saying Hwang has a
“nimble mind, listening ear, and a service heart.” Hwang was also endorsed
by former seat-holder Bob Stacey.
While five candidates applied for the council position, just Hwang and
career conservationist Terri Preeg Riggsby were nominated by Metro
Councilors and placed on the ballot. Five councilors voted in favor of
Hwang and one voted for Preeg Riggsby.
Hwang will take an oath of office Wednesday, January 12, and join the
Metro Council meeting Thursday, January 13.
Metro will hold a formal election in May 2022 for a councilor to serve the
remaining two years of Stacey’s appointment, which ends in 2024. Hwang
said he plans to run for the full term. Three other Metro Council seats—
District 1 covering east Portland, District 2 representing southwest
Portland and parts of Clackamas County, and District 4 covering
Washington County—will also be open in the May primaries.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ELECTION 2022
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Supporters Pack Courtroom for Portlander Facing Federal Protest Charges
Portland's Emergency World Naked Bike Ride Location Released
A Night of Terror: Civil Disobedience Met With Extreme Force at Portland ICE Facility
Photo Essay: Tens of Thousands March in Portland’s No Kings Demonstration
Raymond Lee Confirmed as Portland’s First Long-Term City Administrator
“We’re Investing for the Long Term”: How the Future of Portland’s Historic Albina
District is Coming Together
Editors' Picks
The Best of POP QUIZ PDX: How Much Do YOU Know About Portand's Top Landmarks?
Sassy Trivia Questions About Loudmouth Frat Boys, Annoying TV Hosts, and Local Rich
Dudes Misspending their Moolah!
Five Months Down, 20 to Go: Checking In on Portland’s Charter Reform Makeover
THE TRASH REPORT: Sexy Current Events, Jenna Ortega's Mom Makes Smoking Cool
Again, and What NOT To Do If You're Taking a Picture with Pedro Pascal
THE TRASH REPORT: Celebrity Flames (Not the Fun Kind), a Nepo Baby King, and Guess
Who's Bringing SexyBike?
Mercury Endorsements: District 3 Candidates
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286