Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 26, 2022 at 10:00 am
Portland Energy Fund Updates Grant Review
Process After Controversy
ISABELLA GARCIA
Three people on ladders working on a building
PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY FUND
After public scrutiny of a grant recipient, Portland’s green energy grant
program is bolstering its proposal review process ahead of its second year
of funding. Project staff hope the updated review processes will strengthen
the grant recipients’ projects without jeopardizing the program’s goal of
funding historically underserved organizations.
The Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF), a city climate-focused grant
program funded by a tax on major retailers, was overwhelmingly approved
by voters in 2018. PCEF aims to center Portlanders who are most impacted
by the effects of climate change, like communities of color and low income
people, by funding projects that lower carbon emissions in those
communities and help develop a more diverse green energy workforce.
PCEF awarded its first round of funding in 2021.
Following the historic June 2021 heatwave that killed 54 people in
Multnomah County and nearly 100 people statewide, PCEF launched a
program to deliver 15,000 cooling units to vulnerable Portlanders over the
next five years. PCEF gave a $12 million grant to a local nonprofit called
Diversifying Energy to coordinate the buying of all of the cooling units.
However, an Oregonian investigation found that the company’s role in some
past projects couldn’t be verified and that Diversifying Energy’s executive
director Linda Woodley had spent time in prison for financial crimes.
After PCEF conducted its own investigation into the organization's previous
work, Portland City Council chose to strip Diversifying Energy of the grant.
A new organization was awarded the grant in early January, allowing the
cooling unit project to move forward, but the delay caused by changing the
grantee organization may push the first delivery of cooling units later into
the summer.
According to PCEF project manager Sam Baraso, the investigation and
subsequent change of grant recipient revealed an opportunity for the PCEF
program to improve and strengthen its grant review process. However,
improving the reviewal process includes maintaining the integrity of the
PCEF program, which aims to give emerging community-centered
organizations opportunities to grow in the green energy field.
“Our objective is to set folks up for success, not preclude or prevent them
from accessing funds,” Baraso said of the new review process in a PCEF
meeting last week.
Because PCEF intentionally awards grants to organizations from
communities that have been historically ignored by traditional climate-
related grant programs, many of the grantees have a limited work history.
Without decades of experience to prove an organization’s capacity and
responsibility, the PCEF grant committee will focus on evaluating the level
of risk associated with grant proposals from less experienced organizations.
The PCEF grant committee already reviews and scores each grant proposal
on the proposal’s eligibility for the program and technical feasibility before
moving proposals forward to be considered for funding. The additional risk
review will take place after applicants have made it past the eligibility and
technical screenings and only apply to proposals that meet specific criteria.
Proposals will face additional review if an applying organization is less than
three years old, requests more than $100,000 in project funds for an area
they don’t have demonstrated experience in, or requests funding that’s
more than $100,000 over double their average revenue. Proposals that raise
additional budget and financial concerns are also subject to further review.
Additional review means PCEF staff will ask the organization for more
information, like examples of successfully completed projects of similar
scope or proof of internal financial oversight and governance within the
organization. Grant applicants will be given six business days to provide the
additional information. Woodley of Diversifying Energy was given a day and
a half to provide proof of previous projects and argued that it was not
enough time to contact her previous co-workers who could speak to her
leadership.
With that additional information, PCEF staff will either move the project
forward through the program's scoring process, recommend the project not
move forward, or recommend that the proposal moves forward with more
active management, like releasing portions of the grant money in stages
contingent on regular performance measures.
The additional risk mitigation measures will add an estimated six weeks to
the grant review process. The PCEF grant committee is currently reviewing
grant proposals for the fund’s second round of funding using the new
process and will deliver recommendations to PCEF staff and Portland City
Council for approval in mid-May, as opposed to late March.
Notably, the PCEF program will not perform background checks on any of
the grant applicants. Woodley of Diversifying Energy pointed to her
community-based energy work after completing her prison sentence during
a Portland City Council meeting, arguing that she should be judged off her
current actions and not past mistakes.
“As someone who has worked in the community for a long time, restorative
justice is a value I believe in,” Portland Commissioner Carmen Rubio said in
December when the Oregonian first reported on Woodley’s previous
financial crimes. “Time and again we’ve seen how our justice system can be
a barrier to someone’s ability to make changes and reestablish their life.”
Baraso hopes the new review process further supports emerging
organizations in delivering successful projects, doesn’t deter any applicants,
and protects the viability of the PCEF program in the long-term. The PCEF
program has dual goals of investing in climate-benefiting projects and
building workforce capacity in historically underserved communities that
are most impacted by climate change. Because of the latter goal, PCEF
differs from traditional private investors who see younger organizations as
too risky to invest in.
“While other grantmaking entities may decide not to fund new or emerging
organizations, we are constantly learning how to better manage risks
associated with practices we see as necessary to combat systemic inequity
and climate change,” Baraso said.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Can an AI Goliath Help Oregon Stay Competitive in the Tech Industry?
A Month Before Classes Resume, University of Oregon Faculty Brace for More Layoffs
With a Tenuous Ceasefire in Gaza, Portland Councilors Pledge to Investigate the City's
Links to Israel
Raymond Lee Confirmed as Portland’s First Long-Term City Administrator
Daytime Cooling Centers Reopen In Portland Tuesday Amid Extreme Heat Wave
Transportation Funding Bill Opponents Launch Last-Ditch Effort to Halt Tax Increases
Editors' Picks
Portland Street Response Sees 700 Percent Increase In Workload After Citywide
Expansion
The Portland Mercury Turns 25–Come Party With Us!
Good Morning, News: City Admin Raked Over Coals, Kendrick Dances on Drake's Grave,
and Donald Trump's Firehose of Failure
Multnomah County to Sue Big Oil for Billions for Their Role In Deadly Heat Dome Event
Public Opposition to Gunshot Detection Program Convinces City To Reverse Course
A Guided Tour Through the Mercury's Hot-Shit New Website!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286