Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jul 13, 2022 at 6:05 pm
City Council Considers $107 Million in Clean
Energy Grants
The Portland Clean Energy Fund increased grant giving and added additional risk mitigation measures
following scrutiny
ISABELLA GARCIA
COURTESY OF THE PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY FUND
After receiving both public praise and scrutiny for its grant giving, the
Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF) presented its second, much larger
round of proposed green energy grant projects to Portland City Council
Wednesday. PCEF is asking the city to approve $107 million in green
energy-related grants for historically underserved communities.
“We have a moment in Portland to activate our resources like the clean
energy fund to show not just our region, not just our state, but frankly the
nation what it looks like to center our communities as we not only mitigate
the climate crisis in front of us, but also prepare to adapt,” said Donnie
Oliveira, the director of the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability which
oversees PCEF. “That’s what PCEF represents.”
The $107 million would fund 65 community-oriented projects that address
energy efficiency, renewable energy, green energy workforce development,
and renewable agriculture. The grant projects include major home
upgrades, like $9.4 million to Hacienda Community Development
Corporation to replace gas-powered heating in 243 apartments for low-
income Portlanders, and equitable workforce development, like $7.2 million
to the Constructing Hope Pre-Apprenticeship Program to train 595 low-
income women and people of color in green energy construction trades
over three years.
Michael Edden David Hill, co-chair of the PCEF Grant Committee, told
council that this round of grants hits PCEF’s “sweet spot” of reducing
carbon emissions while also prioritizing communities most impacted by
climate change. Overall, PCEF staff estimate that the projects will lead to a
lifetime reduction of 300,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide, which is
comparable to taking 64,641 gas-powered cars off the road for one year.
This is the second round of proposed PCEF grants after the program was
approved by voters in 2018. Funded through a surcharge on major Portland
retailers, PCEF aims to redistribute money from corporations whose
operations contribute to greenhouse gas emissions to Portlanders who are
most vulnerable to climate change, like low-income people and
communities of color. The program distributed $8.6 million to 45 projects
during its first round of funding in 2021.
Then came a series of criticisms about the voter-approved program.
Changes in spending habits during the pandemic resulted in major profits
for retailers, which in turn raised much more money for PCEF than
originally projected. As PCEF’s revenue swelled from a projected $40
million per year to over $90 million per year, critics claimed that the
program wasn’t getting the money out the door quickly enough. So, PCEF
acted quickly after the deadly heatwave, awarding a $12 million grant to
facilitate the distribution of air conditioning units to a company with a
director whose experience could not be verified, prompting calls for more
significant vetting practices. Then, an early city audit of the program this
year pointed to a lack of specific benchmarks for how much carbon the
program planned to divert through its programs and other oversight
concerns. While the auditor’s office said the concerns and related
recommended changes were typical for a young program like PCEF, the
Portland Business Alliance—a lobbying group representing many of the
businesses hit with the PCEF surcharge—called for PCEF to pause all grant
giving and the Oregonian Editorial Board suggested the program should
limit the scope of its grants until the audit recommendations could be
addressed.
Instead, PCEF staff added additional review steps to its grant application
process, ramped up its yearly grant giving to approximately $100 million,
and devised a timeline to address the audit concerns by 2024.
The additional review process flagged grant applicants requesting more
than twice their annual budget, entering into a new area of work, or that
have been operating for three years or less. If a grant application is flagged,
PCEF staff request additional information about the structure of the
organization, work history, or project partners to answer any concerns or
determine if the proposal should be modified to be more realistic for the
applicant and less risky for PCEF. According to PCEF manager Sam Baraso,
the additional review criteria flagged 44 of the 144 eligible PCEF applicants,
generated 300 emails between staff and applicants, and added about two
months to the grant review process.
If an applicant was able to provide additional information that satisfied the
program staff’s concerns—like adding additional work history that proved
the organization’s capacity or answering budget questions—then the grant
application moved forward to the scoring process. If staff believed a grant
proposal was too ambitious for a new organization, the applicants were
asked to modify the proposal by downsizing the scale, developing project
stages that hinge on the completion of certain project elements, and other
risk mitigation measures.
Of the 65 grants PCEF is asking city council to approve, 30 went through
the additional review process to either gather more information to answer
additional questions or modify the original grant proposal.
City council members were receptive to the steps PCEF staff had taken to
improve the program’s review process following the public scrutiny, but also
pressed the program for more details. Mayor Ted Wheeler noted that
because city council makes the final approval for the PCEF grants, city
council is held accountable by the media for any real or perceived missteps
of the program. Wheeler indicated that, because of the media scrutiny, he
felt pressure to make sure the PCEF grant vetting process was as rigorous as
possible.
“My enthusiasm for the [PCEF] mission has been somewhat tempered by
the reality that there is risk associated with the way this is done,” Wheeler
said.
Wheeler pressed PCEF staff on how the program is avoiding conflicts of
interest, whether the grant vetting process can be further improved, and
questioned whether PCEF has enough staff to reasonably manage the
number of grants it is expecting to give out. Due to the language of the
voter-approved ballot measure that created PCEF, the program can only
use 5 percent of its annual revenue for administration costs. However, as
annual revenue fluctuates and PCEF has increased the staff oversight of
grants as part of its risk mitigation efforts, the 5 percent cap has been
identified as a possible burden. A change to the administrative cap can only
be approved by city council.
While PCEF staff’s methods were interrogated, city council members also
indicated their support and hope for the program. Commissioner Dan Ryan
characterized himself as a “critical friend” of PCEF—someone who is asking
critical questions of the program because he wants it to succeed. While
Wheeler is discouraged by the potential risks of PCEF, Ryan sees the
innovation and related risks of the program as a positive sign for the city.
“Portland needs to be known once again for actually taking some risk,” Ryan
said. “We’ve been resting on our laurels too long, so I’m sitting here getting
excited about where this can go.”
City council will vote whether or not to approve the PCEF grants on July 20.
Correction: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the Oregonian
Editorial Board's position on PCEF. The story has been corrected.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Portland Police Officer Arrested on Domestic Violence Charges
Strike Averted: New Seasons Grocery Workers Secure First Labor Contract
City of Portland Begins Enforcement of ‘Public Camping’ Rules This Weekend
“Not a Rubber Stamp”: Portland City Council Questions Settlement in Bike Bill Lawsuit
PSU Sheds Staff After Expedited Return-To-Office Requirement
Portland City Councilor Hires, Then Immediately Fires Controversial Local Podcaster
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: In Which I Spiral Into Climate Depression Like a Tornado or a
Tropical Depression. Also, Otters, Britney, and Rudy Giuliani!
Christmas Movies I'd Like to See, That One Guy, That Other Guy, and My Favorite
Celebrity Gossip Conspiracy Theory About Brad Pitt
The Sassiest HOLIDAY Trivia Quiz Ever, Featuring Mayor McGrinch, the Best Xmas Toy of
All Time, and Too! Many! SANTAS!!
POP QUIZ PDX: Delicious Trivia About Portland's Best Fast Food (and Those Sexy
Mascots!)
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Ass Trivia About Injured Feet, Stinky Flowers, and the Weird World
of SPORTS!
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About the Latest Political Scandals, Sporty-Sports, and
the Best Movie Ever Made... TWILIGHT (Fight Me!)
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286