STRAIGHT TALK
Sen. Wyden says Inflation
Reduction Act will lower costs for
prescription drugs and cut the
federal deficit
It's an especially sweet victory for Oregon's senior Senator, who is
widely seen as the architect of the measure that will allow Medicare to
negotiate drug prices.

Author: Laural Porter
Published: 3:56 PM PDT August 19, 2022
Updated: 4:16 PM PDT August 19, 2022
PORTLAND, Ore. — Oregon's senior Senator Ron Wyden was at a pharmacy on West Main
Street in Medford when President Biden signed the Inflation Reduction Act into law this week.
It was an especially sweet victory for Wyden, who has fought drug companies for decades in an
effort to bring down the cost of prescription drugs. He's widely seen as the architect of the
measure in the package that will allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices.
Sponsored Links
This Simple 5-Second Method Clears Lungs
Naturally
Breathe Easy
"I was telling the seniors (at the Medford pharmacy) that there was a dose of good news," he
said. "A big dose of good news for thousands of senior citizens in Oregon and hundreds of
thousands across the state, because they were going to get a fair shake, finally, for their
medicine."
Wyden was a guest on this week's episode of Straight Talk to discuss how the Inflation
Reduction Act will bring down costs for Oregonians, among other topics.
Oregon's other Senator, Jeff Merkley, also discussed the new law when he appeared as a guest
on Straight Talk last week.
RELATED: President Biden signs massive climate and health care legislation
$50.00
RELATED: Merkley lauds Inflation Reduction Act for tax equity, lower drug and energy costs
Beating Big Pharma
Wyden and other Democrats have been pushing to give Medicare the power to negotiate drug
prices for decades, ever since President Bill Clinton proposed his health care overhaul in 1993.
Under the Inflation Reduction Act, Medicare will initially be able to negotiate prices for ten
drugs. The first round will start with the most expensive like cancer and arthritis drugs, Wyden
said, with more added to the list later.
Wyden called the new approach a seismic shift in the relationship between Oregon seniors and
Big Pharma, and a long-overdue change to the restriction that prevented Medicare from
negotiating.
"Big Pharma guarded that restriction like it was the Holy Grail," he said. "I called the restriction a
curse. Now, it has been lifted. The gospel in Washington, DC is 'Big Pharma doesn't lose.' This
time, Oregon seniors and folks across the country beat Big Pharma."
The legislation also includes a provision, written by Wyden, that mandates a financial penalty
for drug companies if they raise their prices faster than the rate of inflation.
"So, this would mean for the first time since Medicare began in 1965, there would actually be
consequences for Big Pharma price gouging," he said. "That sends a pretty powerful message"
Tackling Climate Change
Wyden's fingerprints are on another key part of the Inflation Reduction Act: the provisions to
address climate change.
He worked on the Clean Energy for America Act, which passed the House in 2009, but it never
came up for a vote in the Senate.
After that failure, Wyden said he and his fellow lawmakers regrouped and turned to market-
based, technology-neutral tax incentives to reduce carbon emissions. The result was a re-
worked piece of legislation that forms a cornerstone of the Inflation Reduction Act's climate
provisions.
"It's market-oriented and there is going to be competition. So, that's why independent experts
like the Rhodium Group say families are going to save $500 bucks. The market system gives
folks in nuclear, hydrogen, and carbon capture all a chance to compete," he said.
$80 billion to bolster the IRS
The Inflation Reduction Act includes $80 billion for the Internal Revenue Service, more than half
of which is designated for enforcement efforts, including hiring more IRS agents to increase
audits.
Republicans have attacked the provision, arguing that the audits won't just hit billionaires, but
average middle class taxpayers too. Wyden wanted to set the record straight.
"One of the most senior influential Republicans said there would be all these enforcement
agents coming in with assault weapons, and the criminal division (of the IRS) said no way are
we going to do something like that," he said.
The legislation and the additional audits will go after "wealthy tax cheats," he said, not average
taxpayers who pay their taxes with every paycheck.
"They're not the issue," he said. "But these wealthy tax cheats go to their accountants and say 'I
don't pay my taxes that way. Help me exploit all of these strategies for avoidance.' That's why a
number of billionaires have been able to pay little or no taxes for years."
Professionals Use This To
Improve Their Emails
79% of users say Grammarly
Pro makes their work more
polished and professional.
Grammarly
Learn More
He also pledged to keep an eye out to make sure the money designated for the IRS is used the
way lawmakers intended.
"As chairman of the Finance Committee, I am going to be watchdogging this every step of the
way," he said. "So, if I see evidence of what a couple of these senior Republicans falsely said
that there would be — all these people with assault weapons coming in — you better believe I
am going to get that changed."
Fighting inflation by bringing down costs
Critics and non-partisan analysts like the Penn Wharton Budget Model have said the Inflation
Reduction Act will do little or nothing to actually bring down inflation. But Wyden said the
inflation improvements will come from bringing down costs for consumers across multiple
sectors.
"This cuts costs. And what fundamentally Congress can do that really helps in the fight against
inflation is cutting costs," he said.
Those cost reductions include a cap on the cost of insulin for Medicare recipients, reductions in
Americans' energy bills and a provision that limits stock buy backs by companies and
executives.
Those measures will ultimately reduce the federal deficit, he said, leading to an opportunity to
cut borrowing costs for consumers looking to buy things like homes and cars.
Wyden also discussed the recently passed CHIPS Act and how it will benefit Oregon's
semiconductor industry, as well as his legislation to discourage price gouging by big oil
companies and his efforts to protect women's reproductive health data following the Supreme
Court's decision to overturn Roe v. Wade.
In the second segment, Wyden talked about his push to make sure the Portland Trail Blazers
stay in Portland.
"Straight Talk" airs Friday at 7pm and Saturday and Sunday at 6:30pm.
"Straight Talk" is also available as a podcast.
404
We can't seem to find what you're looking for.
OOrreeggoonn SSeenn.. MMeerrkklleeyy ttoouuttss ttaaxx eeqquuiittyy aanndd lloowweerr ddrruugg aanndd eenneerrggyy ccoossttss aass tthhee IInn……
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
TRANSFER NEWS: Oregon Football LOSES Daylen Austin, Jay Harris to Portal. Ducks
Basketball WINS!
KGW
Two homeless shelters in Multnomah County set to close in 2026
KGW
Affordable. Personal. Proven.
UNCP offers support, community and an affordable, high-quality education
that opens doors.
Sponsored By University of North Carolina Pembroke
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...