Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jun 10, 2022 at 12:26 pm
Vulnerable Portlanders Start Receiving Cooling
Units in Preparation for Future Heat Waves
ISABELLA GARCIA
African American Alliance for Homeownership staff delivering the first
cooling unit for the Heat Response Program.
African American Alliance for Homeownership staff delivering the first cooling unit for the Heat Response Program. JASON
QUIGLEY
Portlanders who are most vulnerable to the heat are starting to receive
portable cooling units through the city’s Heat Response Program. The first
of an estimated 15,000 units was installed on Thursday through the
program, created by the Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF) in response to
last year’s unprecedented heat wave.
“Last summer, Portlanders suffered immensely under the extreme heat
emergency caused by the worsening climate crisis,” said PCEF Program
Manager Sam Baraso. “We are proud of our partnership with Earth
Advantage to install life-saving cooling units in the homes of heat-
vulnerable Portlanders.”
Last June, record breaking temperatures killed 54 people in Multnomah
County and 96 people statewide. Majority of the people who died did not
have access to cooling devices like heat pumps—an energy-efficient heating
and cooling device—or air conditioners, according to a county report.
In preparation for similar heat waves in the future, PCEF staff created the
Heat Response Program, which aims to distribute 15,000 cooling units to
homeowners and renters over the next five years.
While originally praised as a quick solution to a lack of heat resilient
infrastructure in Portland, the Heat Response Program and PCEF fell under
scrutiny when an Oregonian investigation revealed the $12 million grant to
facilitate the program was awarded to an organization whose director,
Linda Woodley, was convicted of bankruptcy and tax fraud in 1997. The
investigation also alleged that Woodley misrepresented her work history in
her grant application.
Following public scrutiny, Portland City Council rescinded the grant from
Woodley’s organization and awarded it to Earth Advantage, a clean energy
nonprofit whose background could be verified. Following the controversy,
PCEF developed an additional risk assessment process for grantees and
Woodley sued the city for defamation.
Despite the delays caused by changing facilitators, the Heat Response
Program was still able to meet its goal of starting the first round of
distribution this month. Earth Advantage plans to distribute 3,007 heat
pumps this summer by partnering with seven community organizations
and housing providers who already have relationships with Portlanders
who are vulnerable to the heat. The partners include transitional housing
coordinator Central City Concern, environmental justice organization
Verde, and Reach CDC, an affordable housing provider. Reach CDC is
currently being sued by a group of elderly tenants who allege the
organization has not kept their apartment complex in habitable condition.
The units are being distributed to the community partners’ pre-existing
clients according to eligibility and need, and there is no sign-up for the
program.
The program’s first heat pump was distributed through the African
American Alliance for Homeownership (AAAH), an organization that aims
to promote Black homeownership in Portland through financial counseling.
“The heat wave last summer revealed that many homes were simply not
built for the extreme heat we experienced,” said AAAH program manager
Isaiah Kamrar in a press release. “This Heat Response Program will be able
to serve as a bridge to greater climate resilience within Portland’s African
American community by addressing the urgent, life-threatening challenge
of climate change.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Isabella Garcia
Isabella Garcia is the former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She covered City Hall,
transportation, the environment, breaking news, and more.

If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Local Homelessness Prevention Could See $21 Million Funding Bump
Supporters Pack Courtroom for Portlander Facing Federal Protest Charges
Portland Police Will Continue Patrols at ICE Protests, Despite Restrictions on Overtime
Spending
Update: Oregon Lawmakers Make Another Go at a Transportation Funding Package
Proposed Detention Center Fee Yields Hostile City Council Meeting
Drive-Thru Debacle Threatens to Keep Historic Dairy Queen in a Deep Freeze
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Royal Fingers, Chalamet's Charm, and Dakota Johnson vs. Penguins
Play—With Your Food
Calling All Lovebirds: It’s the Mercury’s LOVE/SEX Issue!
The Mercury 2024 Sex Survey Results!
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About the Latest Political Scandals, Sporty-Sports, and
the Best Movie Ever Made... TWILIGHT (Fight Me!)
THE TRASH REPORT: In Honor of Short Kings. Plus: Ingenius Legal Defense Strategies,
Bears in Portland, and Portland in Song
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286