GOOD ENERGY
TriMet eyes a zero-emission
transportation future with hydrogen
The transit agency's new operations center includes a hydrogen fueling
hub, a potential boost to growing hydrogen industry.

Author: Chris McGinness
Published: 6:02 AM PST November 20, 2024
Updated: 6:02 AM PST November 20, 2024
PORTLAND, Oregon — TriMet is making a big bet on hydrogen, drawing up plans to build a
refueling hub as part of the transit agency's new 31-acre operations center on Northeast
Columbia Boulevard. The hub will serve 14 hydrogen fuel cell electric buses to start with,
funded by nearly $70 million in federal funding from the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
The big picture for TriMet is to operate a zero-emission bus fleet by 2040. The first 14 fuel cell
buses will run along the 82nd Ave Corridor starting in 2029.
Committing to build the fueling station is the next step in TriMet's zero-emission plan, one which
advocates say could spur new business development.
"You need federal support, you need tax credits, you need mandates, there's a whole host of
drivers that will support something like this because it's a big lift," said Jeremy Holland, who sits
on the board of the Renewable Hydrogen Alliance.
"We're focused on supporting the development of renewable hydrogen, educating the
community, engaging with various stakeholders to support essentially creating a hydrogen
economy, and helping decarbonize a variety of end uses that we currently are using fossil fuels
to support, with something that's going to reduce carbon footprint," Holland added.
He likened TriMet's commitment with hydrogen to a big anchor tenant in a mall — if one sets up
shop, others will likely follow.
"We've supported other big lifts to get things going in other industries," he said. "We're in that
stage right now where we need kind of all hands on deck to move us in the right direction to
decarbonize."
"Green" hydrogen is about as low-carbon as it gets, Holland said. The technical name for it is
"electrolytic" hydrogen, which "...uses renewable power and water to split that into hydrogen
and oxygen. The hydrogen is then our fuel source to power the buses that Tri-Met is looking to
deploy here in a few years."
Hydrogen fuel cell transportation has some advantages over current battery-electric vehicles,
specifically greater range and faster refueling times that are more equivalent the gas station
experience. But, TriMet already has 34 battery electric buses in its 681-bus fleet, and the
agency said both types of zero-emission vehicles have a place in its future fleet.
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Professionals Use This To Improve Their Emails
79% of users say Grammarly Pro makes their work more polished and professional.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
OHSU study finds exposure to pollution changes kid's brain development
KGW
Man accused of Safeway stabbing linked to 2017 MAX train platform attack
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...