Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Nov 1, 2024 at 1:20 pm
Will a Fresh Batch of City Leaders Transform
Portland’s Climate Leadership?
Polling data suggests voters see opportunities to strengthen local environmental policies and change
course on issues like oil by rail.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
Sunset at Mocks Crest Park in North Portland, with a view of the Willamette River. TAYLOR GRIGGS
Portland has long been known for a strong ethos of environmentalism
among its population. But with the increasingly dire nature of the climate
crisis, environmental issues are playing a central role in this year’s election.
Amid changes to city government and heightened focus on the efficacy of
Portland’s Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF), residents and
City Council candidates see an opportunity to shift gears on climate action.
Survey data released earlier this week show Portland voters are especially
concerned with how the future City Council will handle PCEF and the
Zenith Energy oil terminal. Both topics have been controversial for current
City Council members, most of whom are running to remain in City Hall.
According to the survey results, Portland voters are more likely to support
candidates who support strengthening PCEF and who oppose Zenith.
The poll was conducted by progressive polling firm Data for Progress and
Lead Locally, an organization that works to address climate change through
local elections. It’s a point-in-time assessment of 579 likely Portland voters
from October 4-9. Though this is a small fraction of Portland voters, the
poll’s findings have been reflected in messaging from many City Council
candidates throughout the campaign season.
Take PCEF, a program approved by a 2018 ballot measure that collects a 1
percent tax on local big business sales and uses it to pay for local carbon-
reduction projects, especially in historically disadvantaged communities.
PCEF is overseen by Commissioner Carmen Rubio–a top candidate for
mayor–in the Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability.
Rubio directed major code changes at PCEF, transforming the program in
alignment with the city’s climate goals, and has been commended for that
work. But she’s been criticized for attempts to redirect PCEF money into
struggling city programs. Fellow commissioner and mayoral candidate
Rene Gonzalez also proposed funding unrelated programs, specifically
public safety initiatives in his portfolio, with PCEF dollars.
According to the voter survey, about 65 percent of likely Portland voters feel
positively about PCEF, and would be more likely to vote for candidates who
support strengthening the program. The majority of Council candidates,
too, have expressed favorable views about PCEF. Most candidates, when
asked in an Oregonian/OPB questionnaire, said they do not support putting
PCEF back on the ballot, and want to make sure the program’s funds are
only used for carbon-reduction projects.
District 1 candidate Jamie Dunphy said he believes PCEF should be
protected, and not used as a “slush fund or a general purpose sales tax.”
District 2’s Marnie Glickman said “we are fortunate to have PCEF because
climate resilience costs are rising,” and the program “shouldn’t be raided to
fund other needs.” Similar sentiments were echoed among many of their
peers.
A minority of candidates said they wanted to expand the uses for PCEF
money by putting the measure back on the ballot. District 4 candidate Eli
Arnold, for example, said he supports asking Portlanders to vote on PCEF
again, and wants to “preserve the original projected size of the program and
move the excess to the general fund.” Other candidates, such as Noah Ernst
in District 1 and Melodie Beirwagen in District 3, said they’re concerned the
tax has a negative impact on businesses in Portland. District 2 candidate
Chris Olson had a different reason for wanting to put PCEF back on the
ballot: He said he wants to increase the tax to 2 percent, ensuring "greater
investment in renewable energy, green jobs, and economic justice."
On the other side of the coin, the survey results show only 22 percent of
Portlanders polled said they feel positively about Zenith Energy’s oil-by-rail
terminal in the Northwest Industrial Area. Just under half of respondents
said they have unfavorable views, with 32 percent saying they didn’t know
enough to say.
In 2022, the Portland Bureau of Development Services (BDS)—then
overseen by Commissioner Dan Ryan, who is running for a seat in District 2
—approved a land use permit for Zenith’s operations in Portland. The city
previously denied the oil transport company a Land Use Compatibility
Statement (LUCS), threatening Zenith’s future in the city. But city officials
gave in after a lengthy legal battle, and a promise that Zenith would switch
to renewable fuels.
Environmental advocates doubted Zenith’s promise to switch to
renewables, and said such a move wouldn’t protect Portlanders in the case
of an earthquake and subsequent oil spill. When Rubio took over BDS in
2023, Zenith critics were hopeful for change, but the city maintained
Zenith’s land use permit. Earlier this year, the Portland Elections Office
found the oil transport company violated local lobbying rules while trying
to get the permit approved, spending excessive time and money trying to
court city officials, particularly Ryan and Rubio.
More than two dozen people running for City Council have indicated they
want the city to have a different relationship with Zenith. In an October 10
letter to the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), 27
candidates asked the agency to delay its decision making about Zenith’s Air
Contaminant Discharge Permit. The candidates said given “the legitimate
concerns of Portland organizations and community members,” they want
the new City Council to have the opportunity to “review past city decisions,
understand any potential enforcement liability, and weigh in during the
public process.”
Most of the candidates who signed the letter to the DEQ are from District 4,
where Zenith’s facilities are located. Six of the candidates who signed hail
from District 2, which would also be heavily impacted in the case of an oil
spill in the Willamette River. The St. Johns neighborhood is directly across
the river from Portland’s Critical Energy Infrastructure Hub, which houses
the Zenith terminal.
Candidates who signed the letter include Mitch Green, Chad Lykins, Eli
Arnold, and Olivia Clark (District 4), Brian Conley, Tiffany Koyama Lane,
and Angelita Morillo (District 3), Jonathan Tasini, Nat West, and Marnie
Glickman (District 2), and Doug Clove and Peggy Sue Owens (District 1).
“Portlanders do not want or deserve to have their safety put at risk by trains
carrying dangerous liquid fuels, whether it is oil or so-called ‘renewable
fuels,’” the letter reads. “Portland residents should be protected by their
government and that’s what we hope to do on city council.”
Portland environmental advocates say they want stronger climate
leadership from the new City Council. In a press release about the polling
results, Oregon Sierra Club Director Damon Motz-Storey said it’s evident
that “Portlanders widely support environmental justice.”
“Portlanders are tired of fossil fuels and the dangers they present to our
communities, our climate, and the natural world, so we see right through
the efforts to greenwash the Zenith crude oil terminal,” Motz-Storey said.
“Climate leadership in Portland requires a commitment to environmental
justice and taking on our biggest polluters.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
“Antifa Hellfire”: Amid Local Uncertainty, White House Attempts to Justify National
Guard Invasion of Portland
A Month Before Classes Resume, University of Oregon Faculty Brace for More Layoffs
State and Federal Losses Stack Up for ODOT’s I-5 Rose Quarter Plan
With Federal Grants on the Line, Portland Leaders Weigh Whether to Comply With
Trump's Anti-DEI Directives
Updated: County Declares Emergency as Portland Faces Dangerous, Extended Heat Wave
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: Farewell to Darcelle, Celebs Who ❤ Portland, and WOLVERINES (All
Types)!
Editorial: What’s at Stake in the Mayor’s Race
It's the Mercury's 2024 Primary Election Night Live Blog!
Behind the Project Pabst Unicorn With Matt Slessler
Judge Rejects Don't Shoot Portland's Request for Class Action Lawsuit
THE TRASH REPORT: George Santos' Stolen Baby, Jada Pinkett Whathisname, and Don't
Even Think About Texting Dolly Parton. And Taylor Swift, Obviously.
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286