Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
2024 WRAPPED
Dec 27, 2024 at 4:10 pm
2024 Wrapped: This Year's Biggest
Environmental News
Clean Energy Fund spending, Willamette River love, and Zenith faces some
heat. This was the biggest Portland environment news in 2024.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
ANTHONY KEO
The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund's
(PCEF) budget is bigger than expected. This year was about
figuring out how to spend it.
Late last year, updated financial forecasts showed that Portland's clean
energy fund—which is fueled by a 1 percent tax on big business sales in
Portland—would have more money to spend on carbon-reduction projects
than leaders previously thought. After approving a $750 million Climate
Investment Plan in 2023, PCEF discovered it actually had about $1.2 billion
to spend over the next five years—and that number has since gone up even
more.
PCEF leaders were enthusiastic about the unexpected funds, and said there
were plenty of ways they could spend it to advance the program's mission to
increase climate resiliency and lower carbon emissions, with investments
specifically targeted for low-income communities and communities of
color. But Commissioner Carmen Rubio—at the time in charge of the
bureau overseeing PCEF—got pushback for some of her suggestions to
allocate money from the fund to unrelated city programs, like Portland
Street Response. People who felt strongly about PCEF's climate justice
mission didn't want Rubio using the program as a slush fund for her own
political gain (she was running for mayor at the time).
Slush fund allegations aside, PCEF made some pretty hefty investments in
carbon-reduction projects this year. In September, the program allocated
$92 million to nonprofit-led climate projects around the city. The grants will
fund energy efficiency upgrades in low-income housing complexes, an
urban forestry internship program, and a plan to get more kids to walk to
school, among other projects. In December, PCEF invested $300 million in
grants for large-scale projects, a good deal of which will go to the city's own
bureaus. Stay tuned for more about PCEF in 2025, as the program will likely
be the subject of attention (and contention?) as Portland's government
changes hands.
Gas-powered leaf blowers are out.
Photo: Getty/Lucentius
Mercury graphic
Believe it or not, those loud, annoying machines are responsible for millions
of tons of carbon dioxide each year, and contribute to poor air quality
locally. E-leaf blowers are the future, as the gas-powered version will be
phased out in Portland starting in 2026, with a full ban in place by 2028.
(Read the Mercury's article on the topic to see some passionate public
comments for and against the ban. People feel very strongly about this!)
NW Natural faces lawsuits for alleged greenwashing.
In October, Multnomah County added NW Natural—Oregon's largest gas
utility operation—to its lawsuit against Big Oil companies. Just days later,
two NW Natural customers filed a class action suit against the company for
a greenwashing "carbon offsets" program. Both lawsuits argue the company
has knowingly disenfranchised customers and contributed to the climate
crisis.
Warnings, Fines, and New Requirements for Zenith Energy
Zenith was in the news a lot in 2024. Here's what you need to know going
into the new year.
Early this year, Zenith Energy—the Texas-based oil transport and storage
company with a terminal in Northwest Portland—received a slap on the
wrist from the City Auditor's Office for violating lobbying code. While the
company was trying to get its land use permit from the city back in 2022,
Zenith representatives took Portland Commissioners Carmen Rubio and
Dan Ryan on site tours and facilitated meetings with them in order to "gain
good will and advance approval of its permit." While the auditor's report
only focused on what the company did wrong, environmental advocates say
Rubio and Ryan should've been held accountable, too.
More recently, the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ)
issued new requirements of Zenith after finding some red flags at an
unannounced company site visit. The DEQ was working on issuing Zenith a
new air quality permit, which it needs to be in compliance with the city's
land use permit and continue operating into the future. But, because the
company made unsanctioned expansions to its operations, it will now need
to seek a new land use permit from the city. This will be one of the first
issues the new Portland City Council deals with when they meet in January
—unless Zenith manages to subvert elected officials and go the
administrative route, which some advocates are concerned about. The DEQ
also fined Zenith $372,600.
The Willamette River got some love.
A scene from a Willamette River party in June. (Photo: Taylor Griggs)
It's no longer en vogue (or, more importantly, accurate) to trash-talk our
beloved Willamette River. Portland's section of the river is (mostly) safe to
swim in now, and there's room for optimism about its future.
Willie Levenson, who runs the organization Human Access Project and
aims to spread the good word about the Willamette River, is largely
responsible for the river renaissance. I call it a "renaissance" because, as I
learned from Levenson and Portland historian Doug Decker, the river used
to be the place to be in Portland. That ended in the mid-1920s, when city
decided to route sewage into the Willamette, and it became the site of
heavy industrialization.
The following quote about the demise of the Willamette and its floating
pools and club houses (one was called Windemuth) is one of the best things
I've ever read. It's from an Oregon Journal article published August 5, 1924.
“The great, the near great and the great unwashed have spent many a
pleasant hour in the soft winds and the cool waters at Windemuth on hot
summer afternoons…It was a wonderful recreational place, and the
sentiment that clung around it will leave a touch of regret in hundreds,” the
article reads. “Isn't man improvident, isn't he short-sighted, isn't he
destructive, in turning this river wonder that God hath wrought, into a
colossal sewer to carry to the sea material worth millions for keeping soil in
its original fertility?”
The river is clean of sewage now, but climate change and the shallow waters
of the Ross Island Lagoon have made toxic green algae blooms more
common. A new DEQ mandate will require Ross Island Sand & Gravel—the
company that mined the bottom of the river for 75 years, changing its
habitat—to restore and reclaim the site, and monitor and manage the algae
blooms.
💚
Portlanders Trees
Trees are always a mainstay in Portland's environmental and climate news,
and 2024 was no different. Some highlights:
1. The city is updating its Urban Forest Management plan for the first time
in 20 years, giving the public and the new City Council an opportunity to
weigh in on the strategy for maintaining Portland's tree canopy. In 2024,
the benefits of trees were clearer than ever. They provide cooling
benefits during increasingly hot summers, but Portland's tree canopy
has declined in recent years. This plan should be in effect sometime in
2025.
2. One thing that will probably come up in conversations about Portland's
tree management plan? "Shade equity," a term meant to illustrate the
disparities in tree canopy coverage across the city. For the most part,
people who live in richer, whiter neighborhoods benefit from having
more trees nearby, while Portlanders in parts of the city that have
historically been poorer and more racially diverse may be surrounded by
more concrete than shade. These inequities are becoming more
apparent as summers get hotter. Advocates from groups like 350 PDX,
which held its third annual Urban Shade Equity Ride in July, are drawing
attention to this problem.
3. Portland tree lovers fought for forests outside city limits, too. Forest
conservationists in Oregon used a variety of tactics, from rallies to tree-
sits, to fight against old growth logging in 2024.
Trees in Portland. (Photo: Taylor Griggs)
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: 2024 WRAPPED ENVIRONMENT
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: In Search of "Fun"—and Other Not-So-Fun Tasks
Portland Comedy Apocalypse
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About Fancy Cocaine, Janet Jackson, and Who Wants to
Be Buried Alive?
City Council Approves Daytime Camping Ban; Legal Challenges Could Arise
THE TRASH REPORT: Women in STEM (Super Toxic Evil Machinations), Plus Celebrity
Smells and Portland's Daddy History
Mercury General Election 2022 Endorsements: State and Federal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286