LOCAL NEWS
Portlanders can apply for free air
conditioning unit ahead of summer
temperatures
People in the Portland area can dial 311 or go online to apply for a
cooling unit.
Author: KGW Staff
Published: 8:11 PM PDT June 11, 2024
Updated: 9:59 AM PDT June 12, 2024
PORTLAND, Ore. — This summer, Portland-area residents in need will have easier access to
apply for free air conditioning units with hot temperatures approaching.
With summer hot spells already beginning across the Portland area, the Portland Clean Energy
Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) is teaming up with Portland 311 services to broaden its
"Cooling Portland program."
The Cooling Portland program was put into place in 2022 after in June 2021, the city of
Portland saw an extreme number of deaths due to the heat. The goal is to install 15,000 cooling
units in the homes of low-income people, with over 8,000 cooling units already installed across
Portland homes.
While the PCEF has been supplying air conditioning units to people across Portland for two
years now, Strategic Partnership and Policy Manager Jaimes Valdez stressed the importance of
partnering with 311 saying, "Integrating PDX 311 allows us to connect with Portlanders in need
and keep people safe ahead of the next heat wave or cold snap."
Eligible applicants will receive a portable device that can both cool during hot summers and
provide heat during the winters. To be eligible, applicants must live in the city of Portland, and
have an income size that is 60% or less of the area median income, adjusted for household
size.
To apply for a free air conditioning unit, people can either talk to a PDX 311 employee by calling
311 or filling out this webform through the city of Portland.
While the city does intend on distributing as many air conditioning units as possible to those in
need, they prioritize those over the age of 60, those who live alone and those who have
medical needs.
Follow KGW on social media: Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | YouTube
Download the KGW News app: Download for iPhone here | Download for Android here
Stream newscasts for free on KGW+ on Roku, Amazon Fire and Apple TV: How to add app to
your device here
See a typo in this article? Email web@kgw.com for corrections.
Related Articles
More than 2,300 deaths linked to excessive heat in US last year
'Bodies haven't acclimated': Health officials warn of heat-related illness risk in
sudden temperature spike
OMSI selected as the Pacific Northwest hub for new heat monitoring project
MMuullttnnoommaahh CCoouunnttyy rreelleeaasseess rreeppoorrtt oonn hheeaatt wwaavvee ddeeaatthhss || TThhee SSttoorryy KKGGWW