NEWS
Why Local Leaders Can’t Seem to Clean the Graffiti Off Portland
“Once you take your foot off the gas, you’re screwed.”
ByAnthony Effinger | Published on January 31, 2024 5:44AM PST
Read More
Gordon's Fireplace Shop, 3300 NE Broadway. (Chris Nesseth)
Paul Watts parked his Ford F-250 along Southeast Stark Street beside Interstate 5 and
Get Portland’s top stories delivered, every morning.
looked at an alphabet soup of graffiti signatures on the concrete walls and Jersey barriers.
Subscribe to our Daily Primer.
ThEemrea wil eArded lraersgse * “throw-ups”—words painted in bubble letters: SYLSNM. OMEGA. BAMBI.
DRAIZ. There were many more quick tags: SARSEX. TERP. HOBOS. CESAR.
Watts, 55, an imposing man who looks like Bruce Willis in his prime, runs Graffiti Removal
ServicSeusb,s car 2ib5e-employee company that’s been in business for 20 years.
He recognized some of the tags—spray-painted nicknames that let the world knSoUPwPO sRoTmeone
braved the traffic and the cops to make a mark. Not many, though, because so few are done
by locals. Most are probably done by taggers who drive up and down I-5 between Los
Angeles and Seattle, Watts says, couch surfing with friends and writing on any surface they
can find.
Read More
Graffiti tags near Southeast Taylor Street on the Central Eastside. (Chris Nesseth)
No matter the source, Watts says he could spray over the graffiti on the Jersey barrier in
about 15 minutes. The other stuff, between the lanes on I-5, would take a little longer.
He said the same thing over and over on a 90-minute drive around town, eyeing low-
hanging (and out-of-reach) graffiti on buildings, sidewalks, construction sites, parking
meters and mailboxes.
There was a whopper on the Morrison Bridge flyover at 2nd Avenue: huge, sloppy red figures
along the top floor of a building. This was a “fire extinguisher tag,” Watts explained. Taggers
drain the retardant out of a fire extinguisher, fill it with diluted paint, pump it up with air at
a gas station, and wield it like a paint flamethrower.
Removing or covering graffiti quickly and consistently is the only thing that deters taggers,
Watts says. “Once you take your foot off the gas, you’re screwed.”
THE LATEST
DRINK
Deadstock Coffee Is Alive in Old Town
FOOD
What We’re Cooking This Week: Radicchio Fried Rice With Hot Honey
CITY
Gateway Is Where Good Intentions Stumbled
COURTS
Mother Forced to Dig Up Son’s Burial Vault
Read More
Graffiti tags near Southeast Taylor Street on the Central Eastside. (Chris Nesseth)
To be sure, it behooveGsI VWE!aGtUtIsD Eto argue for more graffiti cleanup money because he gets paid
Give!Guide Raises $9.2 Million for Portland-Area Nonprofits
to remove the stuff. But he has plenty of private clients and isn’t hurting for work. And
experts agree that removing graffiti, or painting over it quickly, deters taggers from coming
back.
NEWS
WW’s Most-Read Stories of 2025
So why aren’t the city and the state doing more of that?
The answer is a laundry list of the gremlins that have bedeviled local elected officials for the
whole of this decade: a short attention span, a form of city government that balkanizes
NEWS
responsibility for remoMvuallt,n aonmda ha Cleoaudnetrys thoi pSh vuatc Suuunmst oanse d Weeayp’s a Ms aSruklelitv Satnr’ese Gt Suhlcehlt.e Arnd that was
before inflation and a shrinking gas tax hit the Oregon Department of Transportation, which
bears responsibility for detagging hundreds of miles of roads. Portland’s Bureau of
Transportation ran out of money, too.
NEWS
Trump Indicates He Will Send Oregon National Guard Members Home
The result is a city now covered in spray paint, indelible marker, and “mops”—squeezable
cylinders full of ink. (“The perfect marker you can always keep in your pocket, handy, easy to
conceal,” according to online store Bombing Science.)
Read More
So how did we get here, and what can be done? We jotted down those questions, and a few
others, then took to the streets and the phone to answer them.
Is graffiti in Portland worse now that it ever has been?
Probably. The city’s Bureau of Planning and Sustainability says it received 5,260 complaints
about graffiti in 2022, more than double the 2,117 the city got in 2021 and almost six times
2020′s 897. Through May 2023, the latest month for which there is data (because of a
software switch), the city got 2,192 complaints.
Ted Miller, head of maintenance for the Oregon Department of Transportation’s Region 1
(most of the tri-county region and Hood River County), says tagging is through the roof
since COVID.
Read More
“We’ve always painted out graffiti, but we’ve always been able to do it with a crew of two
people in a truck,” Miller says. “Once COVID hit, a switch turned on, and it just exploded.”
Watts agrees. Worse yet, graffiti ethics are breaking down. Before the pandemic, taggers
rarely defaced street art murals, which offered a defense.
“There’s no code anymore,” Watts says. “They are tagging murals like crazy.”
Before the pandemic, taggers rarely defaced street art murals, such as this one on the Central Eastside. (Chris Nesseth)
Who’s doing the tagging?
The consensus among people WW asked was that they are young white guys. A fact sheet
from the city of Houston says “suburban males, pre-teen to early 20s, commit approximately
50% of graffiti vandalism” seeking “fame, rebellion, self-expression and power.”
One former Portland tagger, who declined to be named, said he started painting waRlelsa di nMore
high school for some of the same reasons kids pick up many hobbies.
“It provides the same thing as sports or music,” he says. “There is team spirit and ways to
excel.” And it felt exclusive because “most people can’t even read it.”
Taggers are also thrill seekers, Watts the graffiti remover, says. He can tell from where he’s
had to work: on the sides of buildings that can only be reached with ropes, on the
undersides of bridges, and in the narrow medians of interstate highways.
A rare, high-profile arrest in Portland supports Houston’s demographic claims and the thrill
seeking.
Emile Laurent, 22 at the time, turned himself in in August 2022 after Portland police issued a
warrant for his arrest, alleging he caused $10,000 in damage by writing his tag, TENDO, on
at least 14 buildings. Mug shots of Laurent match the Emile in a YouTube video who launches
himself out of a tree on a skateboard (and sticks the landing!).
Police called Laurent a “prolific graffiti vandal.”
It hasn’t hurt his skate career. He still appears on the website for Swedish apparel firm Polar
Skate Co., and, in March, he made the cover of Thrasher magazine.
Read More
Read More
Gordon's Fireplace Shop graffiti. (Chris Nesseth)
Is graffiti a crime?
Yes. Laurent was charged with felony criminal mischief after police arrested him fleeing the
Oregon Leather Company in Old Town, which he had just tagged.
Prosecutors stacked up more charges against him, making the penalties more severe, by
laboriously identifying his tag all over town. In the end, Laurent pleaded guilty to one felony
count and three misdemeanors. He was sentenced to three years’ probation, 100 hours of
community service, and $6,815 in restitution to his victims.
The problem is that few taggers are ever caught in Portland. Until 2015, the Portland Police
Bureau had a unit that focused on graffiti, Watts says. He remembers painting a wall for the
cops, who would rig it with motion-sensing cameras and wait. When a tagger showed up,
they’d make an arrest.
“Due to staffing issues, the bureau was forced to reduce its Graffiti Unit from two officers
down to one and eventually eliminate the entire unit in December 2015,” the Police Bureau
said in its 2015-16 annual report. “Prior to the elimination, the unit was able to arrest many
prolific graffiti artists.”
Leaving graffiti on your building for more than 10 days is also a violation of city code. If
forced to remove it, the city may charge the property owner for the service, plus an
overhead fee of 25% and a civil penalty of $250 for each abatement.
But, clearly, the code isn’t being enforced. Graffiti stays on buildings for months. Need
proof? Drive by the old Gordon’s Fireplace building on Northeast Broadway.
Sale of spray paint is also restricted by city code. Cans must be kept in locked cabinets or in
storerooms, and records of sales must be kept for two years. Businesses that violateRe tahde More
code can be fined up to $5,000.
But there are plenty of places to buy spray paint, markers and mops online, including
Bombing Science (“bombing” means hitting as many surfaces as possible in a given area).
WW bought a Clockwork Orange (the color) graffiti mop for $6.95, no questions asked (we
were tempted by Death Black).
“These restrictions only created inconvenience for the homeowner,” Watts says. “The
taggers aren’t buying spray cans. They’re stealing them or finding ways to get them online.”
Read More
Read More
Along with graffiti, Gordon's Fireplace Shop is dotted with murals painted with permission. (Chris Nesseth)
Who’s in charge of removing graffiti?
It depends on where the graffiti is.
Property owners are responsible for their own buildings. ODOT is responsible for state and
federal highways. The Portland Bureau of Transportation cleans local streets. Multnomah
County owns the bridges. The city handles city property, and the railroads (rich targets)
handle theirs.
The various jurisdictions form a patchwork that can be difficult to navigate. Watts, for one,
would like to tackle whole blocks at a time, removing and painting over graffiti on any
surface he can. But even during a big cleanup in 2022, he couldn’t tackle parking meters or
city road signs because city code requires union employees of PBOT to do that work.
The bureau says it uses in-house employees because, if cleaned improperly, signs lose their
reflectivity, becoming unreadable at night.
Similarly, Miller at ODOT is working to clean up I-84 in Sullivan’s Gulch, where graffiti mars
bridges, road signs, and just about any flat surface. The artery, one of the first things visitors
see driving in from the airport, is a tangle of jurisdictions, including Union Pacific Railroad, a
property owner that acts like a government unto itself.
Read More
Grafitti below the on-ramps of Interstate 405. (Chris Nesseth)
So who dropped the ball?
In terms of city work, graffiti removal used to reside with the Office of Community & Civic
Life, run by former City Commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty. Civic Life took a softer approach to
the problem. In an April 2021 press release, then-program coordinator Juliette Muracchioli
said she was pleased to preserve Black Lives Matter tags and murals as Civic Life removed
others.
“I am proud of the graffiti program’s work this past year,” Muracchioli said. “Not only have
we proactively responded to graffiti complaints, but we have also been sensitive to the
historic moment we are living in. During the height of the Black Lives Matter movement, the
city permitted BLM-related messages and street art to remain on city assets.”
Hardesty didn’t return an email seeking comment.
Mayor Ted Wheeler tapped senior adviser Sam Adams to lead the anti-graffiti efforts. Before
Adams was mayor, he worked for Vera Katz, who hated the stuff. Read More
“Vera infected me with OCD about graffiti and utility pole posters,” Adams tells WW. “That
infection has only grown over the years.”
Adams clashed with Hardesty over graffiti strategy. Adams wanted tougher penalties for
defacing traffic safety signs, but Hardesty disagreed, Adams said. In October 2022, the
mayor moved the graffiti program to the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability.
Months earlier, Wheeler had declared an emergency to create the Public Environment
Management Office, or PEMO, and vested it with the authority to erase graffiti in the
Central Business District. Staff at BPS collects complaints and does cleanup, but Wheeler’s
PEMO acts as a sort of SEAL team, swooping in on trash and graffiti when conditions get
really bad.
As part of the push, Adams engaged Watts, who says he went to work without a contract
because time was of the essence. Watts and his team cataloged all the graffiti downtown and
identified 23,345 tags.
Watts’ firm spent five months pressure washing, scrubbing and painting, and got that
number down to 7,189.
Read More
Graffiti tags near Southeast Taylor Street on the Central Eastside. (Chris Nesseth)
And it would have stayed that way if the city had kept its foot on the gas. But shortly after
the holidays, Portland downshifted, Watts says. Part of the problem: Wheeler and Adams
parted ways in January 2023 amid complaints that Adams belittled staff, including graffiti
leaders.
“After Sam left, we had no advocate,” Watts says.
Wheeler’s office says the mayor is still very much in the fight against taggers. Since July, BPS
has spent $525,800 to remove 190,600 square feet of tags reported by Portlanders. It does so
free of charge to small businesses, homeowners and nonprofits. And since PEMO’s
inception, it and BPS have sponsored the removal of more than 300,000 square feet of
graffiti.
“Mayor Wheeler takes the issue of graffiti in our community seriously and has spearheaded
a number of initiatives meant to improve livability,” his office says.
Read More
But last year, the Oregon Department of Transportation ran out of money just when it
needed it most. Pandemic-related inflation drove up the cost of road maintenance, leaving
little for graffiti. As of now, ODOT’s Region 1 has just $210,000 for the two-year period that
started July 1, 2023, down from $1 million the prior biennium (Oregon budgets run two
years). ODOT is backing a bill in the Legislature that would allocate it another $4 million.
Worse yet, the Portland Bureau of Transportation in November exhausted $750,000 from
the American Rescue Plan that it used to fund a four-member team that removed graffiti
from 10,000 signs, 3,200 posts, 1,400 bike racks and 12 planter boxes. Since then, it has been
doing only smaller projects with city funds, a spokeswoman says.
Taggers likely used a grappling hook to pull down the ladder to the fire escape on Jackson Tower and leave their marks.
(Brian Burk)
What can be done to deter graffiti?
This is a tough one. Taggers are determined and, often, ingenious.
Read More
A few made their way to the top of Jackson Tower on the south side of Pioneer Place and
painted high-profile, bubble-lettered throw-ups there, likely by tossing a grappling hook
and pulling down the ladder on the fire escape, Watts says. He and his team had to hire
professional climbers to help them remove those tags (brick by brick because Jackson Tower
is a historic landmark).
Filling blank spaces with murals used to work, but, as Watts says, they’re fair game now. And
ODOT can’t put razor wire at the base of highway signs because it could injure someone.
Some cities have set up “free walls,” where taggers can tag to their heart’s content, legally.
Watts says that’s a loser, too, because taggers often tag their way to and from the wall on
surrounding structures, often trashing public transit.
Boston ivy can work as a deterrent, especially on highway sound walls, where ODOT lets it
grow. The use of English ivy is off-limits because it’s an invasive species that takes over
forests.
The best graffiti protection is public activity, like food carts, and better lighting, Adams says.
Taggers want to put their work in high-traffic places where the greatest number of people
will see it. To do that, they operate at night. During the pandemic, downtown buildings were
sitting ducks because so few people were present, day or night, Adams says.
The unanimous consensus among experts is that fast, consistent removal is the best
deterrent. Taggers move on if their work doesn’t endure, they say.
Read More
Read More
Graffiti along Interstate 84 in Northeast Portland. (Chris Nesseth)
So, how do you clean off graffiti?
It depends on the surface.
Most paint-removal products contain acetone, alcohol or lacquer thinner. The problem is
that Portland city code prohibits letting that cocktail of chemicals reach drains and the river.
Water from pressure washers used to remove paint and cleaning solution must be collected.
Watts, for one, carries expensive water collection systems on his trucks.
The other option is painting over tags. ODOT doesn’t do removal. It just covers tags and
graffiti with “ODOT Gray” paint from Metro’s recycled paint program.
Read More
Read More
ODOT has to replace big green highway signs rather than clean them. It took this one down early Sunday morning. (Chris
Nesseth)
What about the graffiti on huge highway signs?
If you’re a taxpayer and you’re not pissed off yet, prepare to be.
During the pandemic, big, green federal highway signs became tagger trophies. Drive along
Interstate 405 right now and you’ll see that someone has whited-out sections of signs
directing drivers to Highway 26 and other exits. Other signs sport large tags.
The problem here is that these signs can’t be cleaned. Chemicals that remove paint also
remove the coating that makes the signs reflective and visible at night.
That means they must be replaced. ODOT’s sign shop in Salem has to make a brand-new
sign. When it’s ready, ODOT calls shipping companies and tells them that the road in
question will be closed for a few hours in a month, because truckers use the roads at night.
Crews go out with the sign and a big crane, close the highway or a couple of lanes at around
4 am, pull down the old sign, and put up the new one. They replaced a huge one over I-84
early on Jan. 28.
The price for all of this: as much as $8,000 per sign.
And there’s no guarantee taggers won’t hit it again. “We’ve found that they get around
almost anything we do,” ODOT’s Miller says.
The highway department has begun putting a film on signs, like muralists do with wax on
their work. The film works because it can be sprayed off, along with tags. But the treatment
only works a couple of times, Miller says. Then it’s time for a new sign.
Read More
Graffiti lines the shoulders of Interstate 84 and is the first thing many visitors see on their way into town. (Chris Nesseth)
Isn’t Gov. Tina Kotek on the case here?
Yes. Kotek convened her Portland Central City Task Force last year to come up with
solutions to the city’s blight, including graffiti. The PCCTF made recommendations in
December, and Kotek said she would ask the Legislature for $20 million in ODOT funding for
trash and graffiti.
The good news is, if it comes through, all the money would go to ODOT Region 1 (Portland
and its environs). Miller says ODOT will use $4 million of the money for graffiti and $4
million for trash. For better or worse, he’s banking on it. He has fill-in-the-blank templates
written and plans to put contracts out to bid as soon as Kotek signs the bill.
“We’re in the starting blocks,” Miller says. “We’re not waiting until the money comes.”
Read More
Read More
Gordon's Fireplace Shop. (Chris Nesseth)
What about private money?
Tim Boyle, chief executive of Columbia Sportswear, is taking matters into his own hands.
He’s donating $150,000 to clean up one of the worst stretches in Portland: I-405, from the
Fremont Bridge to the east end of the tunnel on Highway 26.
Like many people in Portland, Boyle blames lax law enforcement for the graffiti problem.
“The cost of cleaning up graffiti that some of these people generate could be $100,000,”
Boyle tells WW. “A graffiti-ist who’s doing that much damage should be put in jail.”
Eager to see taggers in orange jumpsuits, Boyle is among the biggest donors to criminal
prosecutor Nathan Vasquez, who’s running against Mike Schmidt for Multnomah County
district attorney. Boyle says cops told him Schmidt won’t throw the book at graffiti
offenders.
Schmidt’s office says that’s not true. He studied graffiti cases from January through
September and found that Portland police referred 17 of them to his office. Schmidt issued
charges in 15 of those, or 88%.
“DA Schmidt knows that graffiti is a significant community concern,” spokeswoman
Elizabeth Merah says. “Our office takes a hard stance on graffiti cases, and we pursue these
cases aggressively.”
It’s not impossible to imagine that a CEO’s frustration with graffiti will indirectly lead to a
new top prosecutor in Multnomah County. But Miller at ODOT hopes for another outcome:
that the Boyle project will lead to others under the rubric “Sponsor a Highway.” It would be
like “Adopt a Highway,” but instead of rallying volunteers to don orange vests and wield trash
pickers, it would seek cash donations to clean up garbage and graffiti.
Washington state has a similar program that has shown results, Miller says. He hopes to get
a pilot started with Boyle in March, when the rains stop and it’s easier to clean up graffiti
(the rain complicates chemical removal and water capture). Read More
By then, Miller hopes the Legislature will also have showered ODOT with millions in new
funding. A guitarist and rabid Tom Petty fan (he has strings from Petty’s guitars in rings on
his fingers), Miller, like his hero, won’t back down.
“With those dollar amounts, I see crews working seven days a week from 6 to 6,” Miller says.
“I think we can make an improvement.”
Anthony Effinger | aeffinger@wweek.com
Anthony Effinger writes about the intersection of government, business and non-profit organizations for
Willamette Week. A Colorado native, he has lived in Portland since 1995. Before joining Willamette Week, he
worked at Bloomberg News for two decades, covering overpriced Montana real estate and billionaires
behaving badly.
Willamette Week’s reporting has concrete impacts that change laws, force action from
civic leaders, and drive compromised politicians from public office.Support WW
SUPPORT
Around The Web
Knee Experts Stunned: New CVS Hides This $1 Generic North Carolina Legalizes
Device is Changing Lives Viagra - Here’s The Aisle It's Online Cannabis Purchases
Fast Really in
Mood
RejuvaKnee Friday Plans
Read More
If Your Dog Licks Its Paws, Cardiologist Warns
Stop Feeding Them This Americans: "Pour out The
Immediately Bottled Water"
ExpertsInPetHealth Hard Boiled Eggs Are Well Being For All
Sparking Controversy in The
Health Community (Here's
Why)
Well Being For All
Say Goodbye to Ingrown & 2026 Limited-Time Sale: Seniors Born 1939-1969
Thick Nails With This The Embroidered 250th Receive 11 Benefits This
Revolutionary Nail Clipper Anniversary Cap Month If They Ask
peoasis Peoasis Super Saving Online
Read More
ALSO ON WILLAMETTE WEEK
3 days ago •1 comment 5 days ago •65 comments
UUnniioonn SSaayyss DDeeppaarrttiinngg CCiitt
LLeeggaaccyy AAddmmiinniissttrraattoo
CClliinniicciiaannss TToo …… ……
Read More
Read More
Willamette Week Comment Policy
Comments that are irrelevant or incendiary will be deleted. Got it
Disruptive users will be banned at WW's discretion.
What do you think?
19 Responses
Upvote Funny Love Surprised Angry Sad
0 Ratings
★★★★★ 0.0
79 Comments  1 Login
Rate and comment ★★★★★★★★★★
G
Join the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS ?
Name
Want more?
Subscribe to Willamette Week's newsletter to get the best of each issue delivered straight to your inbox.
✉ Enter email address Subscribe
Hide this message
 Share Best Newest Oldest
Z Zbignew − ⚑
2 years ago
Any surprise Hardesty had her hand in the reduction of enforcement and removal. At least
Read More
they were consistent and didn't enforce much of anything with regards to graffiti, saving the
victims thousands of $$ in fines.
l ⥅
24 0 Reply ⥅
T tolduso > Zbignew − ⚑
2 years ago
As long as it was somehow related to her failed blm terrorists.
1 0 Reply ⥅
Sponsored
How familiar are you with Comcast Business?
Very familiar
Somewhat familiar
Neutral
Not very familiar
Never heard of Comcast Business
1 of 3 Next
snusjunction − ⚑
2 years ago
Portland's motto, "The City That Works." During the pandemic it was "The City that Slept."
Thrown in DEI - can't remove BLM tags - and the City is trashed.
And can't paint over graffiti without "union labor" and water used must be collected because it
could hurt fish.
Fish can rest easy.
21 0 Reply ⥅
R Rosemary Orlandi > snusjunction − ⚑
2 years ago
I would rather they worried about sewage spills in the water !
0 0 Reply ⥅
mycentstoo − ⚑
2 years ago
They should be getting jail time and every morning take them out to clean up graffiti. Back to
jail at night; rinse and repeat.
16 0 Reply ⥅
Read Mo−−re
This comment was deleted.
>G t ⚑
mycentstoo > Guest − ⚑
2 years ago
Defacing buildings, public roads, and signs is not art, and, according to the
article it is a crime.
2 0 Reply ⥅
−−
This comment was deleted.
F fifth_doctor > Guest − ⚑
2 years ago
Lte's hope someone gives you an invountary tattoo that says
MAGA.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Z Zander JA > Guest − ⚑
2 years ago
Yup. And graffiti is not art.
1 0 Reply ⥅
−−
This comment was deleted.
Steve in PDX > Guest − ⚑
2 years ago
Make all the art you want, but buy your own damn canvas, felon.
5 0 Reply ⥅
−−
This comment was deleted.
Steve in PDX > Guest − ⚑
2 years ago
Buy your own canvas, butthead. If you had any talent people
would buy your crap.
Oh, BTW, I've been earning a comfortable living selling my own
art for thirty-five years.
Haven't tagged private property yet.
0 0 Reply ⥅
sscamaro16 − ⚑
2 years ago edited
Do they make silencers for shotguns with rock salt cartridges that doesn't emit a visible flash at
Read More
night?
Asking for a friend.
/s
/s
14 0 Reply ⥅
T tolduso > sscamaro16 − ⚑
2 years ago
Careful.
Shidt would surely prosecute the victim if they dared hurt one of his precious street
criminals.
0 0 Reply ⥅
S SS − ⚑
2 years ago
food carts as a deterrent huh? So would have been Wapato jail which could have been filled
with taggers, druggies, and the garden variety of criminals, sadly Portland's leftists do 'not'
consider punishment as a deterrent...
13 0 Reply ⥅
Ad removed. Details
N NoPo Resident − ⚑
2 years ago
But, but I thought giving my ID to buy a can of spray paint was going to stop this!!
13 0 Reply ⥅
OregonGal80 − ⚑
2 years ago
We were driving down powell a week ago and three punk little twerpy teenagers were tagging a
bus stop in broad daylight. they couldn't have been more than 14. I hate teenagers.
10 0 Reply ⥅ Read More
S Smoked Armadillo > OregonGal80 − ⚑
S
2 years ago edited
The city should be doing more to make them pay up or tag up their family reputation,
especially if they're affluent out of towners from Beaverton or Lake Oswego like
sending them to collections or filing civil claims which would be a smear on the
parents' reputation.
Notable families would absolutely hate coverage like "the xx family being sued by a
nearby city for their brat teen's graffiti vandalism".
1 0 Reply ⥅
Seems2Me − ⚑
2 years ago edited
“The problem is that few taggers are ever caught in Portland.”
“the Office of Community & Civic Life, run by former City Commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty…
took a softer approach to the problem. In an April 2021 press release, then-program
coordinator Juliette Muracchioli said she was pleased to preserve Black Lives Matter tags and
murals as Civic Life removed others.”
More selective enforcement of city laws. Another city employee, deciding which rules they will
enforce and which they will ignore. This is why we have graffiti all over the city. Muracchioli
appointed herself Empress of All She Surveys and redefined graffiti as “street art.”
But yes, let’s blame Mike Schmidt for the problem
10 0 Reply ⥅
Isabel4578 > Seems2Me − ⚑
2 years ago
Hardesty has been gone for over a year and Schmidt is still in office. It's possible to
do two things at once. Both are at fault.
3 0 Reply ⥅
Javier Sodo > Isabel4578 − ⚑
2 years ago
And so is Wheeler for firing Sam Adams.
2 0 Reply ⥅
Kyle Hanson > Javier Sodo − ⚑
2 years ago
WTF??? Firing Sam (the pedophile) Adams was the BEST decision
Wheeler has made as Mayor of Portland!! How could you actually
think Adams brought anything positive to City Hall that couldn't
be gotten from someone else who hasn't tampered with a witness,
Read More
or lied to the general public repeatedly about his attraction to a
juvenile and how he violated the law in order to act upon his
attractions?Imean seriously areyouThatfuckingwarpedinthe
attractions? I mean, seriously, are you That fucking warped in the
brain or what? You know what, strike that. I dont even want to
what goes on in the head of someone like you, You are probably
just another freak like Adams anyway.
1 1 Reply ⥅
Help us dig deeper.
Contribute to Local Journalism.
Donate
Find a Paper About WW
Sign up for our Newsletters Add Your Event To Our Calendar
Subscribe or Get a Back Issue Advertise
Become a Friend of Willamette Week Work With Us
Contribute or Intern
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Twitter Get Portland's top stories delivered straight to
YouTube your inbox, everyday.
Facebook
Instagram Email Address *
Bluesky
RSS Feeds
Subscribe
Read More