Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
GOOD MORNING, NEWS!
Dec 24, 2024 at 8:43 am
Good Morning, News: City Bureaus Get
Millions From Portland Clean Energy
Fund, the Fight to Save Sesame Street,
and the Junk Science Around Junk Food
COURTNEY VAUGHN
Pedestrians stroll Peacock Lane in Southeast Portland. Tell your grandkids this is the reason we had to cut down Forest Park.
COURTNEY VAUGHN
If you’re reading this, you probably know the value of the Mercury’s news
reporting, arts and culture coverage, event calendar, and the bevy of events
we host throughout the year. The work we do helps our city shine, but we
can’t do it without your support. If you believe Portland benefits from
smart, local journalism and arts coverage, please consider making a small
monthly contribution, because without you, there is no us. Thanks for your
support!
Good Morning, Portland! It's Christmas Eve for those who celebrate, and
today's forecast calls for mostly rain and clouds, with a potential brief visit
from the sun. Today's high is 51. Not bad for December.
We'll be taking a break tomorrow for the holiday. We don't know what Santa
will bring this year, but for now, we bring you the news.
suze.bauer
View profile
Original audio
View more on Instagram
In Local News:
• Portland’s Clean Energy Fund, which was approved by voters and created
in 2018, has been raking in way more cash than expected. The fund has
doled out grant money to local nonprofit organizations doing climate work.
It’s also giving millions to local school districts to help them upgrade their
HVAC systems and make other climate-friendly site improvements. But the
fund–which is controlled by a city bureau–has also been shelling out
millions to the city’s own bureaus. The funding has raised questions about
whether PCEF is being used to backfill budget gaps at the city. For instance,
the city is using PCEF money to replace its fleet vehicles with zero or low-
emissions models, and it’s also using the fund to help pay for infrastructure
projects like sidewalks. Taylor Griggs has the deep dive.
Portland Mercury
@portlandmercury.com
More than a third of the $300 million from the Clean Energy Fund's
new program will go to the city's own bureaus, for projects with
nonprofit partners. That's on top of $623 million in PCEF funds
approved earlier this month for climate initiatives within city bureaus
• ICYMI: PGE, the electric utility that keeps raising our rates, is proposing
cutting more than 370 trees on five acres in Forest Park to install new
transmission lines. PGE says chopping the trees is necessary in order to
bolster its grid amid increased electricity demands.
• Multnomah County announced Monday that county commissioners
approved $4.1 million in Supportive Housing Services funds (which get
passed to the county by Metro) to fund a new village-style shelter on SE
82nd Ave. The 38-pod Harrison Community Village will be developed on
property the county purchased in 2022. It previously housed an RV
dealership. County officials expect the new shelter to be completed in late
2025. The forthcoming shelter is in addition to 200 temporary overnight
shelter beds the city of Portland and Multnomah County are collaborating
to open this winter.
• Just because the holidays are upon us doesn’t mean there’s nothing to do
around Portland. From movies to go see, to festive restaurant offerings and
live shows, Everout has compiled the best of the local event listings. Check
it out here.
Portland Mercury
@portlandmercury.com
Check out all the holly-jolly events to keep you busy this week, from
The Jinkx & DeLa Holiday Show to The Annual Kachka Latke Party and
the Christmas Day film premieres of Nosferatu and Babygirl. It's our
top picks of the week!
124.7K
773
86.4K
Watch more exciting vid Watch now
@fraserandcompany
#santa #merry #fyp
Because I Got High - Afroman
In National/World News:
• Trump wants to buy Greenland. No, really. What's up with rich people
thinking they can just buy a country? This ain't Schitt's Creek.
The incoming president floated the idea during his first term in office, but it
wasn’t taken seriously. Now, he’s at it again after recently insisting that the
US needs to regain control of the Panama Canal. America ceded control of
the canal to Panama back in 1999, but now, Trump says US-bound goods
that get shipped through the canal are subjected to tariffs that are too high.
Trump’s absurd offer to buy the country is likely part of a strategic move to
gain control of shipping routes. According to the AP, Greenland’s head of
government was clear: “Greenland is ours. We are not for sale and will
never be for sale,” he said. Trump’s response (via Truth Social): “We’ll see
😑
about that!”
• You know things are screwed when Sesame Street is in danger. The beloved
children’s show that for decades, used a combination of puppets and people
to teach kids how to count, read, and process emotions, was canned by
HBO. Before streaming services transformed the way we watch TV, Sesame
Street was broadcast exclusively on PBS, virtually guaranteeing public
access to the show. In 2016, the show migrated to HBO to air new episodes.
But HBO recently opted not to renew Sesame Street, and now the nonprofit
company that produces the show is scrambling to find a new streaming
service that can bring in enough revenue to keep the show going.
• In recent years, bars and restaurants have leaned heavily on mock meat
products like Beyond burgers to offer basic meatless options. Vegans and
vegetarians have also turned to the faux chicken and beef products as a
savory source of protein that closely resembles the real thing. Most mock
meat products rely either on pea protein or soy as the main ingredient.
Recently, a study from a team of nutrition researchers at the University of
São Paulo and Imperial College London lumped these meatless products in
with “ultra-processed” plant-based foods that lead to heart disease and
early death. Several major media outlets parroted the study's conclusions.
But Vox dug deeper about how the study was conducted and what foods
were included. Turns out, the data was collected years before brands like
Impossible or Beyond existed, and only a small fraction of study
participants ate mock meat products over a two-day period.
The study's lead researcher told Vox that no "meaningful conclusions" can
be drawn from the study with specific regard to plant-based meat products.
Despite that, the study was released with images of meatless sausages to
illustrate ultra-processed vegan food's negative impact on health. What's
more, the study also included foods like tofu and tempeh, which have been
produced and consumed in Asian countries for centuries, as ultra-
processed plant foods. In reality, while processed foods are generally
considered unhealthy, what constitutes "ultra-processed food" for the
purposes of determining nutritional value is broad and debatable, and often
predicated on arbitrary data.
Finally, this dog is all of us.
the.roadwelltraveled
View profile
Original audio
View more on Instagram
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: GOOD MORNING, NEWS!
Courtney Vaughn
Courtney Vaughn is the news editor at the Portland Mercury. She appreciates your news tips
and musings. Reach out at cvaughn@portlandmercury.com or on Bluesky.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In Good Morning, News!
Good Morning, News: Portland’s Hefty Festival Fees, Oregon’s Newspapers are
Dwindling, and Workers are Staying in Jobs They Hate, For Now
Good Morning, News: Tariffs Eve, Gaza Aid, Parking Fees, but Most Importantly, It's Our
Birthday!
Good Morning, News: Light Punishment for Super Reckless Local Driver, Thousands of
Hollywood Celebs Pledge Support for Gaza, and Portland Wants To Weed Out “Unserious”
Political Candidates
Good Morning, News: Local Conservatives Proven Wrong (Again), Trump is About to Get
Played by Putin, and the Blazers Have a New Owner
Good Morning, News: Hot New Land Use Fee for ICE Landlords, Luigi Mangione Attorneys
Argue to Suppress Evidence, and Columbia Sportswear CEO Challenges Flat Earthers
Good Morning, News: Oregon Has the World's Ugliest Dog, RFK Jr Blamed For Influencing
CDC Gunman, and Morrow County Officials Charged With Pocketing Millions From
Amazon Data Center Contracts
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Tim Scott Is Excited to Spend Time With His Very Real Girlfriend,
Teachers' Strike Drags on, and Animal News You Can Animal Use
THE TRASH REPORT: Royal Fingers, Chalamet's Charm, and Dakota Johnson vs. Penguins
Advocates Fear Increased Pedestrian Deaths in Planned Rose Quarter Project
Flashes of the 2020 Protests
The Mercury's 2024 Queer Guide: Endless Queer Summer
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About the Latest Political Scandals, Sporty-Sports, and
the Best Movie Ever Made... TWILIGHT (Fight Me!)
Popular Articles
Good Morning, News: Portland Can't Regulate on Zenith, Portlanders Can't Get Vaccines,
and Jackie and Shadow Face an Old Foe—Developers
Good Morning, News: Light Punishment for Super Reckless Local Driver, Thousands of
Hollywood Celebs Pledge Support for Gaza, and Portland Wants To Weed Out “Unserious”
Political Candidates
Good Morning, News: More Bonkers Signal Chat Stuff, a Rare Oregon Orca Sighting, and
Why Aren't Portland Elementary Schools Retrofitted for Earthquakes?
Good Morning, News: Oregon Takes on Greenwashing, Palestinian College Activist
Arrested by ICE, and Canada Vows to "Drop Gloves" with Trump
Good Morning, News: State Transpo Referendum, PSU Union Busting, Epstein Associate's
Prison Toilet Paper
Good Morning, News: "Fake" Oregon Firefighters Arrested in LA, Fake TikTok Shutdown,
and Fake Patriot Moves Back to the White House
Good Morning, News: Heat Warnings Continue, Street Racers Outrun Portland Cops, and
Trump Threatens Military Occupation of Cities He Hates (👋)
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286