-40%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
THE STORY
Oregon needs to find funding
sources to replace its aging
infrastructure, report finds
At the rate Oregon is currently replacing its bridges, civil engineers
calculated that a bridge might need to hold up for 900 years before
replacement.
Fox Nation - Sponsored
New Season of Last Cowboy
Standing on Fox Nation!
Author: Pat Dooris, Jamie Parfitt
Published: 7:12 PM PDT August 14, 2024
Updated: 7:35 PM PDT August 14, 2024
SALEM, Ore. — While the Portland International Airport's new terminal opened to rave reviews
on Wednesday, other components of Oregon's infrastructure system are not faring so well. A
⌃

recent "report card" for the state's airports, dams, bridges and other essential public systems
gave Oregon an underwhelming C- grade overall.
The 137-page report was conducted by civil engineers, the sort of people qualified to design
and evaluate public infrastructure. And throughout Oregon, these engineers found that there's
a lot more funding needed to maintain and modernize infrastructure — funding that needs to
come from somewhere.
Greg DiLorero is one such civil engineer, and until 2013, he was CEO of the Tualatin Valley
Water District. In the past, he's helped write and promote a national report card on
infrastructure, and recently, he introduced a version for Oregon.
"I want to emphasize this report is a reflection of the systems we have in place and their current
and expected ability to withstand external stressors, such as increases in energy demands,
population growth, increasingly severe weather and shifting traffic patterns, which are factors
we are seeing impact almost every state in our nation," DiLorero warned.
Oregon's C- grade matches the national average, last measured in 2021, and it's the same
grade Oregon received back in 2019. While it's certainly not a good result, that parity suggests
that Oregon isn't lagging far behind the rest of the country. That said, the state may have some
unique issues putting strain on its infrastructure.
"Oregon's decades of population growth," said Ana Tijerina Esquino, one of the report's
authors. "As more people have moved to Oregon due to the high quality of life we have here,
some infrastructure systems are now being asked to accommodate surging usage. This means
more people are on our roads and our bridges and relying on our water systems than they
were initially designed for.
"Oregon's infrastructure is also showing signs of decades of deferred maintenance. This is
because we have been kicking the proverbial can down the road about fixing and maintaining
our infrastructure. Despite recent efforts to address this, our infrastructure is still under
immense strain."
Up in the air
The report was developed by the Oregon section of the American Society of Civil Engineers.
They looked at 12 different areas, ranging from aviation to wastewater treatment systems, and
found a number of reasons for concern. Individual areas got their own grades, which averaged
out to the overall C- grade.
Collectively, for instance, Oregon's public airports scored a C- grade. While PDX is the state's
largest airport, Oregon has 97 in all, many of them quite small. In examining runways, civil
engineers found that 84% were either in good, satisfactory or fair condition. The other 17% were
ones to be concerned about.
RELATED: Growth and expansion: The history of PDX airport
Only 36 of Oregon's airports are equipped to store fuel. With wildfires becoming more and
more common, the engineers recommended that another 20 airports begin storing fuel for
firefighting aircraft.
Meanwhile, 16 public airports are located along the Oregon Coast, 10 of them in tsunami zones.
If the "Big One" happens and a tsunami follows, those airports are likely to be put out of
commission.
Bridging the gap
Oregon's bridges also received a C-, representing a slide downward from 2019, when they
scored a C. That said, about 5% of Oregon's bridges were found to be in poor condition, which
is lower than the national average.
"However, the age of our bridges across the state presents a serious problem down the road,"
said Tijerina Esquino. "Already, more than half the bridges in Oregon are more than 50 years
old and are approaching the end of their design life."
Oregon has 8,292 bridges, and roughly 22% of them are in poor or almost-poor condition. Most
of those are over that 50-year-old hump.
The Oregon Department of Transportation reports that each year, only three new bridges are
built to replace outdated bridges. If that rate is sustained, the civil engineers determined, an
Oregon bridge would need to remain in service for 900 years before replacement, when they
typically last 75 to 100 years.
With that in mind, the engineers responsible for this report agreed with ODOT that the state
needs to, at the very least, link Oregon's gas tax to inflation so that the agency keeps making
enough money to keep up on maintenance. ODOT also wants several other funding sources
for its struggling budget.
READ MORE: ODOT faces a maintenance funding gap. Lawmakers want to know how
Oregonians would prefer to pay for it
Dammed if we do, damned if we don't
There are 889 dams in Oregon, and the report gave them a D+ grade — a particularly poor
showing out of all the areas covered.
The Army Corps of Engineers maintains a national inventory of the 90,000 dams across the
U.S. In Oregon, they note 171 with the potential for "high hazard" and loss of life if they fail. Of
those, 28 received a poor or unsatisfactory rating.
Another 171 Oregon dams pose a "significant hazard," and 547 are deemed "low hazard" dams.
The good news is that Oregon has slightly improved funding for safety regulations on existing
dams and started an emergency action plan for the 76 dams regulated by the state in the "high
hazard" category. Most of the large federally regulated or owned dams are in satisfactory or fair
condition.
But in the next five years, 70% of Oregon's dams will be older than their expected lifetime of 50
years. And 98 dams are twice that age — more than a century old. The report found that none
are prepared for the expected big Cascadia earthquake.
Keeping it clean
One of Oregon's bright spots came in the form of drinking water. The state received a C in that
area, which is an improvement from 2019.
"More than 99% of Oregon's drinking water systems meet the Environmental Protection
Agency's standards for safe drinking water," said Tijerina Esquino. "Water systems in Oregon
generally have stable supplies and are capable of handling future growth. Much of Oregon's
drinking water system is relatively new compared to other parts of our country, with most lines
installed over the last 50 years. This is really good news for us as water utilities face new rules
that will require the removal of lead service lines."
The EPA estimates that only 3,500 water lines in Oregon are made from lead, or less than 1% of
all water lines in the state.
Engineers pointed to projects like the Washington Park Reservoir replacement in Portland. The
original reservoir was built in 1894, and the new one is replacing it with a 12 million-gallon,
seismically reinforced underground reservoir. It's expected to be finished by the spring of 2025,
with a total cost of $211 million.
And that's really the secret overall to improving Oregon's grades — money. The engineers
issuing the report card said the state needs to contribute much more money toward clean
water infrastructure, to the tune of $10 billion.
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Dementia and Memory Loss Has Been Linked To this Common Food - Do You Eat It?
Brain Defender|Sponsored Click Here
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
I always get compliments when I wear this top
Last day of discounts
Findbestes™|Sponsored Shop Now
Switching Checking Accounts Could Earn North Carolina Seniors a Big Bonus
Sign up in minutes and earn a cash bonus when you make eligible deposits
Forbes|Sponsored Learn More
Judge orders ICE detainee released on the spot after learning he was arrested without
a warrant
KGW
Reports: Tommy Lee Jones' daughter found dead in San Francisco hotel
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...