-25%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
BUSINESS
First US auction to develop floating,
offshore wind farms off the West
Coast
Similar auctions are in the works off Oregon's coast next year and in
the Gulf of Maine in 2024.
Credit: AP
Hywind Scotland, the world's first commercial wind farm using floating wind turbines, is visible off the coast of
Scotland in August 2017. Tuesday, Dec. 6, 2022, marks the first-ever U.S. auction for leases to develop commercial-
scale floating wind farms in the deep waters off the West Coast. (Woldcam/Equinor via AP)
Author: Gillian Flaccus (Associated Press)
Published: 8:17 AM PST December 6, 2022
Updated: 8:37 AM PST December 6, 2022
PORTLAND, Ore. — Tuesday marks the first-ever U.S. auction of leases to develop commercial-
scale floating wind farms, in the deep waters off the West Coast.
The live, online auction for the five leases — three off California's central coast and two off its
northern coast — has attracted strong interest and 43 companies from around the world are
approved to bid. The wind turbines will float roughly 25 miles offshore.
The growth of offshore wind comes as climate change intensifies and need for clean energy
grows. It also is getting cheaper. The cost of developing offshore wind has dropped 60% since
2010 according to a July report by the International Renewable Energy Agency. It declined 13%
in 2021 alone.
Offshore wind is well established in the U.K. and some other countries but is just beginning to
ramp up off America's coasts, and this is the nation's first foray into floating wind turbines.
Auctions so far have been for those anchored to the seafloor.
Europe has some floating offshore wind — a project in the North Sea has been operating since
2017 — but the potential for the technology is huge in areas of strong wind off America's
coasts, said Josh Kaplowitz, vice president of offshore wind at the American Clean Power
Association.
SHOP NOW
IN OTHER NEWS
Sneaker-themed Deadstock
"We know that this works. We know that this can provide a huge slice of our our electricity
Coffee announces new Old
needs, and if we're going to solve the climate crisis we need to put as many clean electrons
Town location
online as we can, particularly given increases in load demand with electric vehicles," he said.
"We can reach our greenhouse gas goals only with offshore wind as part of the puzzle."
Similar auctions are in the works off Oregon's coast next year and in the Gulf of Maine in 2024.
President Joe Biden set a goal of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind by 2030 using
traditional technology that secures wind turbines to the ocean floor, enough to power 10 million
homes. Then the administration announced plans in September to develop floating platforms
that could vastly expand offshore wind in the United States.
Related Articles
Oregon Coast targeted for offshore wind development
Biden administration targets Oregon coast for wind power generation
Tiny Oregon town hosts 1st wind-solar-battery 'hybrid' plant
WWiinndd ttuurrbbiinneess ccoouulldd ssoooonn ssttaarrtt ppooppppiinngg uupp ooffff tthhee OOrreeggoonn CCooaasstt
The nation's first offshore wind farm opened off the coast of Rhode Island in late 2016, allowing
residents of small Block Island to shut off five diesel generators. Wind advocates took notice,
but with five turbines, it's not commercial scale.
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
-25% -30%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
Globally, as of 2021, there were only 123 megawatts of floating offshore wind operating, but
that number is projected to increase to nearly 19 gigawatts — 150 times more — by 2030,
according to a report last week by Offshore Wind California.
The California sale is designed to promote a domestic supply chain and create union jobs.
Bidders can convert part of their bids into credits that benefit those affected by the wind
development — local communities, tribes and commercial fishermen.
As envisioned, the turbines — possibly nearly as tall as the Eiffel Tower — will float on giant
triangular platforms roughly the size of a small city block or buoyant cylinders with cables
anchoring them underwater. They'll each have three blades longer than the distance from
home plate to the outfield on a baseball diamond, and will need to be assembled onshore and
towed, upright, to their open-ocean destination.
Modern tall turbines, whether on or offshore, can produce more than 20 times more electricity
than shorter machines, say, from the early 1990s.
As for visibility, "in absolutely perfect conditions, crystal clear on the best days, at the highest
point, you might be able to see small dots on the horizon," said Larry Oetker, executive director
of the Humboldt Bay Harbor, Conservation and Recreation District, which has been preparing
its deep-water port for the projects.
Offshore wind is a good complement to solar energy, which shuts down at night. Winds far out
to sea are stronger and more sustained and also pick up in the evening, just when solar is
going offline yet demand is high, said Jim Berger, a partner at the law firm Norton Rose
Fulbright who specializes in financing renewable energy projects.
California has a 2045 goal of carbon neutrality. But "when the sun goes down we're relying
more on fossil fuel generation," Berger said. "These projects are huge so when you add a
project or a couple projects, you're adding significantly to the power generation base in the
state," he said.
-25% -30%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
The lease areas have the potential to generate 4.5 gigawatts of energy -- enough for 1.5 million
homes — and could bring big changes to communities in the rural coastal regions nearest the
leases.
In remote Humboldt County, in northern California, the offshore projects are expected to
generate more than 4,000 thousand jobs and $38 million in state and local tax revenue in an
area that's been economically depressed ever since the decline of the timber industry in the
1970s and 1980s, according to the Humboldt Bay Harbor, Conservation and Recreation District.
The district already received $12 million from California to prepare its deep-water port for the
potential assembly of the massive turbines, which are too tall to fit under most bridges as they
are towed out to sea, said Oetker, the district's executive director.
"We have hundreds of acres of vacant, underutilized industrial property right on the existing
navigation channel ... and there's no overhead bridges or power lines or anything," he said.
But some are also wary of the projects, despite favoring a transition to clean energy.
Environmentalists are concerned about the impacts on threatened and endangered whales,
which could become entangled in the cables that will anchor the turbines. There are also
concerns about birds and bats colliding with the turbine blades and whales getting struck by
vessels towing components to the site. Federal regulators have set a boating speed limit for
the project of less than 12 mph to address that concern, said Kristen Hislop, senior director of
the marine program at the Environmental Defense Center.
"Floating offshore wind is brand new and there's only a couple projects in the world and we
don't know how that's going to impact our coast," she said.
Tribes in the vast coastal regions also worry about damage to their ancestral lands from turbine
assembly plants and transmission infrastructure. They fear that the farms will be visible on clear
days from sacred prayer spots high in the mountains.
-40%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
Frankie Myers, vice chairman of the Yurok Tribe, has attended four wind developer conferences
in the past year. Tribes worked with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, which is
overseeing the leasing process, to secure a 5% bid credit that includes tribal communities for
the first time, he said. The agency also helped with a cultural assessment of the potential
impact on views from sacred prayer spots, he said.
The tribes are so engaged now, early on, because they are used to outside industries coming
to them with promises that aren't fulfilled. They've seen things done wrong, and knowing this
windswept area intimately, they want this to be done right, he said.
"Before they even showed us the map, before they even showed us all of their breakdowns ...
we were like, 'We know exactly where it's going,'" Myers said. "There's no question where the
best wind comes from, we all understand that. We've been here for a couple of thousand
years."
___
Follow Gillian Flaccus on Twitter here.
___
Associated Press climate and environmental coverage receives support from several private
foundations. See more about AP's climate initiative here. The AP is solely responsible for all
content.
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
Professionals Use This To Improve Their Emails
79% of users say Grammarly Pro makes their work more polished and professional.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Gucci Brow Bar Aviator Sunglasses, 57mm
Gucci Brow Bar Aviator Sunglasses, 57mm
Bloomingdale's|Sponsored Shop now
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
HUGE: More KEY Players Staying at Penn State + Iowa State Players Predicted to Join!
KGW
UCF Knights Desperate QB Search, Will Scott Frost’s Million Dollar Moves Work? I UCF
Podcast
KGW
-30%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...