Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Dec 23, 2024 at 1:20 pm
Awash With Cash, Portland Clean Energy Fund
Marks New Strategy With Latest Investments
PCEF will allocate $300 million in grants for large-scale projects. A hefty portion of funds will go to the
city’s own bureaus for infrastructure projects and decarbonization.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
With its latest round of grants, PCEF will support TriMet's plan to improve transit service on 82nd Avenue. PORTLAND BUREAU OF TRANSPORTATION
Recent funding allocations from the Portland Clean Energy Community
Benefits Fund (PCEF) demonstrate a shift in the program’s strategy, in
response to its growing revenue.
Though city staff say the carbon-reduction and climate resiliency program’s
mission is still community-centered, the clean energy fund is now doling
out millions to Portland’s bureaus during a time of financial uncertainty for
city operations.
In its latest round of grants, approved by the outgoing Portland City
Council at their final meeting on December 18, PCEF plans to distribute
$300 million among eight large-scale climate projects. The grants include
plans to improve transit service on 82nd Avenue, create more sidewalks
near schools, replace the city’s fleet vehicles, and add green infrastructure
and energy-efficient housing to the Broadway Corridor in Northwest
Portland, among others.
More than a third of the funding from this grant program, dubbed
Collaborating for Climate Action, will go to projects headed by Portland
bureaus alongside nonprofit partners. The investment comes after PCEF
allocated an additional $623 million to city bureaus for climate work,
formalized by City Council earlier this month.
PCEF’s previous grant cycles have supported projects led by nonprofit
organizations, ranging in scope and budget. In September, PCEF split up
nearly $92 million among 71 projects for its third round of community
grants. Many organizations received awards ranging from $100,000 to
$500,000, and the largest single grant was about $6 million.
By comparison, PCEF’s latest round of awards are much larger, and the
recipients include government agencies like the Portland Bureau of
Transportation (PBOT), TriMet, and Prosper Portland. Each award recipient
will work with at least one project partner to carry out their plan. For
example, PBOT is teaming up with Oregon Walks for its Sidewalks to
Schools program, which was awarded $20.5 million in PCEF funds.
PCEF was created by a voter-approved ballot measure in 2018 as a means
of spurring clean energy projects and job training, and is funded through a 1
percent tax on local sales at large businesses. Late last year, the program
received an unexpectedly strong financial forecast. Earlier in 2023, PCEF
leaders developed a $750 million Climate Investment Plan to guide the
fund’s spending over five years. Now, the city expects PCEF will have $1.6
billion to use on carbon-reduction projects in that same timeframe.
As PCEF evolved, city leaders and members of the fund’s committee had
different opinions about how to prioritize the program’s spending. PCEF
was crafted specifically to help people of color and low-income Portlanders,
who are most impacted by the effects of the climate crisis but have
historically been overlooked when it comes to investments from the city.
Low-income communities and communities of color are less likely to have
abundant tree canopy coverage, leaving residents more vulnerable to
extreme heat events.
Clean energy fund leaders say the program is still dedicated to funding
unique projects led by community nonprofit organizations. But recent
budget decisions have been met with concerns about the fund being used
to fill city funding gaps rather than to support community-led carbon
reduction efforts. As Portland's government officially changes hands and
the city continues to deal with budget deficits in other areas, PCEF will
likely continue to be the subject of political debate.
PCEF’s changing budget—and role
At the same time PCEF leaders learned of the fund’s updated—and bullish
—financial forecast last year, other city bureaus were struggling. After a
good deal of back and forth about maintaining the integrity of the fund,
PCEF stepped in to help.
While Portland City Council did agree to allocate a one-time, $7.6 million
transfer of PCEF interest dividends into the city’s general fund, most of the
clean energy fund’s contributions to city bureaus have been dedicated to
climate-related projects. An amendment to PCEF’s Climate Investment
Plan approved by City Council earlier this month earmarked $623 million
for city bureaus over the next five years.
Much of the funding will go to PBOT and Portland Parks & Recreation, and
is dedicated to city programs that PCEF agrees will contribute to its overall
goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions citywide.
The latest PCEF allocation comes as the city of Portland faces an estimated
$27 million budget deficit in the upcoming fiscal year.
Donnie Oliveira, interim deputy city administrator for Portland’s
Community and Economic Development service area (which houses the
Bureau of Planning and Sustainability and PCEF), acknowledged the
importance of the community grants at the December 18 Council meeting.
“Our community-responsive grants are the backbone of the program, and it
still remains the priority for this program to invest in our community
organizations,” Oliveira said. “But this opportunity is very unique. It asked
our partners externally to partner with sometimes unusual suspects, to find
new ways to deliver climate justice, provide economic prosperity and
opportunity, and keep after our climate action goals for the city.”
The recent amendments to the Climate Action Plan also increase funding
for the community grants program by $120 million, which will offer more
opportunities for nonprofit organizations to seek grant funding.
Collaborating for Climate Action funding
The Collaborating for Climate Action grant program is another initiative
developed in response to PCEF's new financial outlook. Sam Baraso, PCEF’s
program manager, told the City Council the program was “designed to fill a
gap in our climate funding ecosystem” and complement other PCEF-funded
projects.
PCEF received more than 50 proposals, totaling about $2.4 billion, for
Collaborating for Climate Action funding. The fund moved forward with
eight:
$24.9 million for Portland Solar for All, to install rooftop solar capacity
and backup battery storage for about 2,700 low-income Portland
households. The project will be led by Energy Trust of Oregon in
partnership with Asian Pacific American Network of Oregon (APANO),
Community Energy Project, Energy Assurance Company LLC, Oregon
Department of Energy, Oregon Solar Energy Education Fund, Self
Enhancement, Inc.
$31.5 million for a project that aims to “deliver large-scale
environmental, economic, and community benefits” to underserved
populations through a combination of solar, battery storage, and energy
efficiency upgrades. The project, called Empowering PDX, will be led by
Bonneville Environmental Foundation, partnering with organizations
including APANO, Central City Concern, Leaders Become Legends, and
Verde to serve 1,500 BIPOC and low-income households.
$70.3 million for energy-efficient HVAC systems, LED lighting,
transportation decarbonization, green schoolyard projects, and more at
all Portland school districts, with a focus on schools that serve low-
income students and students of color. Local districts will partner with
the Coalition for Communities of Color.
$36 million for the first phase of the Broadway Corridor project. Project
leaders plan to install green infrastructure and net-zero middle-income
housing in Northwest Portland’s Broadway Corridor, which includes the
14-acre US Postal Service site, and grow a “diverse green construction
workforce” in the process. Prosper Portland leads the project, with
partners including Oregon Tradeswomen, PBOT, Portland General
Electric, Portland Housing Bureau.
$20 million for the Clean Energy Industry Program, to clean up local
industrial operations. The effort is led by the Portland Bureau of
Planning and Sustainability (BPS) with partners including the Portland
Metro Chamber Charitable Institute, Portland State University Institute
for Sustainable Solutions, Neighbors for Clean Air, and Prosper Portland.
The program aims to “transition the industrial sector toward a cleaner,
more inclusive future,” and will use funding to conduct feasibility studies
and “capital projects for efficient and renewable industrial
technologies.”
$41 million for Collaborating for Climate Action on Workforce
Development and Capital Improvements, led by the Portland Bureau of
Fleet & Facilities with partners Portland Community College (PCC) and
PCC Foundation. The funds will be used to replacePortland’s fleet of
vehicles with electric or low-emissions models, and provide
opportunities for career pathways in fleet and facility maintenance to
disadvantaged students through PCC.
$55.5 million for bus transit upgrades on 82nd Avenue. TriMet aims to
create infrastructure for Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) along 82nd Avenue, as
well as workforce development and corridor cooling, and will partner
with organizations including 82nd Ave Coalition/Asian Pacific
American Network of Oregon (APANO), Metro, PBOT, and PCC to use
the funds. TriMet will use PCEF funds to match federal dollars to help
pay for the project, which is projected to cost about $361.7 million in
total.
$20.5 million to PBOT and Oregon Walks for the Sidewalks to Schools
project, which aims to support low-carbon transportation (walking) by
building new sidewalks near schools, especially in low-income
communities and communities of color, like Cully and East Portland.
Among the funded projects, the Sidewalks to Schools program has received
particular enthusiasm from community advocates. Oregon Walks Executive
Director Zachary Lauritzen pointed out the project’s potential for long-
term change, saying he sees it as a way to “build the tools for our
community, to get kids understanding how to move around safely, and in
low or no-carbon modes.”
“If our kids grow up and their only option is to hop in the back of mom and
dad’s car to get to school, that’s part of their rhythm,” Lauritzen said at the
City Council meeting. “We appreciate this as a long-term investment.
People are going to feel it, see it in their community.”
Meanwhile, the Clean Energy Industry Program has been met with
skepticism. Megan Horst, co-chair of the PCEF Committee, said at a
committee meeting that the program’s application was “unusual” and the
“concept is not fully developed.”
“It’s a lot of money to put in a planning project,” Horst said.
With lingering hesitation, committee members ultimately agreed to fund
the project. Planners say it will result in one of the only “clean industry
hubs” in the nation, and was directly influenced by Danish models of
industrial symbiosis and sustainable power production.
PCEF’s future
With everyone except Dan Ryan leaving the City Council next year, Mayor
Ted Wheeler said he hopes the clean energy fund will remain under strong
leadership as the city government changes hands. The incoming City
Council will face serious budget challenges across bureaus amid an
escalating urgency for strong climate action. The government structure will
be different, but PCEF’s future may still hang in the balance.
“At the end of this meeting, there will not be a commission form of
government meeting in the city of Portland ever again. That accountability
under Commissioner Carmen Rubio will no longer be a part of the
structure of this government,” Wheeler said. Rubio oversaw BPS, which
houses PCEF, during most of her time in office.
“Somebody [in the future City Council] will need to step into that role and
be as accountable as Rubio was.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT CITY HALL
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Transportation Funding Bill Opponents Launch Last-Ditch Effort to Halt Tax Increases
City of Portland Begins Enforcement of ‘Public Camping’ Rules This Weekend
Legacy Health Staff Say They’ll Stay on Strike Until Company Offers Better Deal
PSU Fired Women’s Resource Center Director With No Explanation
The Lawsuit that Broke the Council’s Back
Mercury Endorsement: Vote Yes on the Portland Parks Levy
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Ass Trivia About Rampaging A-holes, Boys and Their Toys, and Don't
Be a Drag, Be a Queen! 👑
What Multnomah County Voters Could Learn From Others Who Ousted Progressive DAs
Thorns, Timbers Fan Groups Sever Ties With Club Management Over "Devastating"
Report
POP QUIZ PDX: It's the Very Best of Our "KNOW THAT PORTLAND" Trivia Questions!
THE TRASH REPORT: Flares, Margs, and a Thesis Proposal! Am I in College Again?
THE TRASH REPORT: Beetlejuicin' Boebert, Pappin' Pitt, and Misogyny in General
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286