Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Sep 12, 2024 at 2:25 pm
After a Major Overhaul, Has Portland's Clean
Energy Fund Found its Footing?
PCEF will invest nearly $92 million in climate projects around the city. Leaders say nonprofit grantees
were thoroughly vetted and the projects align with the city's climate goals.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
A 2022 home solar panel installation through the Power to the People PDX program, a previous PCEF grantee. PORTLAND BUREAU OF PLANNING AND SUSTAINABILITY
Energy efficiency upgrades in low-income housing complexes, an urban
forestry internship program, and a plan to get more kids to walk to school:
These are just three of the 71 projects that will receive support from the
Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) in its latest round
of community grants, intended to reduce local carbon emissions at the
grassroots level.
On Wednesday, Portland City Council approved PCEF’s recommended
allocation of nearly $92 million in community grants. The vast majority of
the money will go toward implementation of 65 carbon reduction projects
in categories including energy efficiency and transportation. About half a
million dollars is allocated for planning grants.
PCEF has held two competitive funding cycles in the past, distributing a
combined $108 million for more than 100 projects in 2021 and 2022. But
PCEF’s third grant cycle, which opened to applicants last November, was
the program’s first since going through a massive overhaul last year. The
program is housed in the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability (BPS), now
part of the Community and Economic Development service area.
The program, approved by voters as a 2018 ballot measure, is funded by a
small surcharge on large retailers in Portland, and its financial success
vastly outperformed initial estimates. But PCEF has taken a few years to
find its footing, in part because it had trouble getting all that money out the
door. The fund has also been criticized for a lack of oversight of nonprofit
contractors.
Despite some lingering skepticism, program leaders maintain the program
is now on track to deliver real climate and equity results for the city—and
they say this latest round of grants is the perfect example of what’s possible
through PCEF.
“Through the incredible response we received to our third request for
[grant] proposals, we have witnessed the growth in capacity of our
community organizations,” Sam Baraso, PCEF program manager, said in a
press release. “This shows us the urgent need for climate action projects
that increase resiliency in our communities. That need is not tomorrow, but
right now. And our partners are eager to keep this positive momentum
going.”
Changes at PCEF
When PCEF was first adopted, the program was heavily reliant on grant
contracts with nonprofit partners to carry out carbon reduction work in
underserved communities. But the program’s structure has significantly
changed over the past few years.
During PCEF’s first grant award cycle in 2021, the fund awarded nearly $12
million to an organization whose leader had a history of financial
impropriety. The funding was rescinded, but PCEF received significant
backlash for its perceived lack of due diligence when awarding grants.
Community concerns about the program’s rollout were validated by a 2022
city audit, which said its performance metrics and standards were unclear.
The audit advised PCEF leaders to set transparent, clear goals for project
implementation, and to be more specific about how the fund is aiding
Portland’s carbon reduction goals.
Program leaders apparently took the feedback to heart. The fund’s
programming is now centered on a $750 million Climate Investment Plan,
which is mainly dedicated to specific strategic initiatives to be overseen by
PCEF staff.
After receiving an unexpectedly optimistic financial forecast late last year,
the fund has also been able to bail out struggling city bureaus, with the
caveat that the money will help with carbon reduction projects. For
example, the money PCEF allocated to the Portland Bureau of
Transportation (PBOT) will pay for projects to boost bicycle use and reduce
carbon emissions in the transportation sector.
However, it’s evident by the recent $92 million investment in nonprofit
projects that community grants are still a program cornerstone.
PCEF leaders were sure to emphasize the transparency and accountability
present throughout this round of grant applications and awards.
“As this process moves forward, we are committed to ensuring that every
dollar allocated through PCEF is spent responsibly and delivers real,
measurable outcomes for our communities,” Donnie Oliveira, interim
deputy city administrator for Community and Economic Development, said
at a City Council meeting on September 5. “This means we are continuously
strengthening our oversight mechanisms to track the progress and
performance of projects that receive funding…Grantees have clear,
measurable targets and report requirements so that everyone can see
exactly how the funds are being used.”
The program has begun using Webgrants, the new grant tracking system
that will soon be rolled out for the rest of the city’s outgoing grant process.
Members of the public can view all PCEF grant applications on the Portland
Map App. And earlier this year, PCEF released its program dashboard,
which tracks money the fund spends and other metrics, including climate
benefits and workforce development.
Despite improvements in process and oversight, at least one city
commissioner still has doubts.
At the September 5 City Council meeting, as PCEF leaders introduced the
recommended grantees, Commissioner Mingus Mapps appeared skeptical
about the program’s ability to cut carbon emissions to the extent necessary
to meet Portland’s climate goals.
PCEF has estimated the $91.9 million it spends on this round of grants will
result in a lifetime reduction of roughly 85,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalent (CO2e). However, according to Portland’s Climate Emergency
Workplan, this is a mere fraction of the millions of metric tons of CO2e
necessary to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050.
“That makes me awfully concerned. This is one of our major investments in
the climate space, and it gets us about 3 percent of where we hope to go in
the next six years,” Mapps said. “It seems we have a scale problem.”
In response, Oliveira said while PCEF is making a major investment in
carbon reduction projects, it was “never designed to meet all the city’s
climate goals.”
“PCEF was originally intended to provide an avenue for resources to
communities, for resiliency, and to spur innovation as well. When we talk
about the major reduction goals that we have as a city, as a state, and
globally, we're talking about systemic shifts,” Oliveira said. “I don’t want to
minimize [PCEF’s investments], but the big maneuvers we’re looking at are
going to require multi-jurisdictional investments that are much bigger than
PCEF.”
In other words: PCEF won’t solve everything. But leaders maintain it’s a
good start, and could have far-reaching benefits beyond carbon reduction
metrics.
Where is the money going?
In its third round of grant funding, PCEF will dole out 71 implementation
and planning grants to local organizations for climate action projects that
prioritize under-resourced populations in the city. In this way, the projects
have multiple proposed benefits: In addition to their carbon reduction
potential, a project may also set out to reduce energy costs for low-income
households or increase job opportunities for people of color.
“Project benefits provided to households and individual community
members goes well beyond greenhouse gas reduction and includes
improved indoor air quality and comfort in homes, climate resilience,
reduced utility bills, training, connection to living wage jobs, access to high
quality fresh foods, and connection to community,” PCEF’s funding
recommendations report states.
PCEF split the grants into several categories, which align with the program’s
Climate Investment Plan. These categories include energy efficiency,
transportation decarbonization, regenerative agriculture and green
infrastructure, and workforce development. Here’s a look at some notable
projects from each category.
Energy efficiency:
$5.2 million to Northwest Native Chamber for a project to conduct
energy efficiency retrofits on 210 homes, with funds targeted toward
Native households and Native-owned clean energy construction
companies.
Nearly $2.9 million to Verde for a project to install more than 1,200
residential heat pumps, at low or no cost, to priority populations in
Portland (specifically BIPOC and low-income communities). The project
is a partnership with the Energy Trust of Oregon.
$3.46 million to Morning Star Missionary Baptist Church for a project to
build an energy efficient resilience hub at a church in the Cully
neighborhood, which would serve as a place for community refuge
during extreme weather events or other emergencies.
Renewable energy:
$1.09 million to Bridges to Change for a project to install solar energy
infrastructure in recovery housing complexes.
$6 million to REACH Community Development, Inc for energy
efficiency projects at three affordable multifamily housing sites in
Portland, through installing rooftop solar panels, heat pumps, and
completing air sealing.
$4.1 million to APANO Communities United Fund to install solar panels
and energy efficiency upgrades for low-income residents along 82nd
Avenue, as well as to install five electric vehicle charging stations on the
corridor.
Workforce development and contractor support:
Nearly $1.5 million to the Blueprint Foundation for an urban forestry
internship program designed to help communities of color access
careers in urban forestry and environmental restoration, increasing
local tree canopy cover and enhancing local green spaces in the process.
$1.5 million to Oregon Tradeswomen, Inc to provide training and
employment for women in the clean energy construction trades.
Roughly $1.4 million to Growing Gardens to provide regenerative
agriculture workforce training to people in correctional facilities, with
the aim of helping people find post-incarceration employment
opportunities, reducing recidivism rates, and building up the green
agriculture workforce.
Regenerative agriculture and green infrastructure:
$1.3 million to Bird Alliance of Oregon for restoration of the
organization’s Wildlife Care Center on 82nd Avenue, with the goal of
improving habitat conditions for local wildlife, increasing biodiversity,
and helping the community connect with natural resources.
$1.04 million to Equitable Giving Circle for a project to create a hub for
distribution of fresh, locally-sourced produce. Project goals include
supporting local farms and helping educate community members about
nutrition and sustainable agriculture.
$1.2 million to Depave for turning underutilized paved areas into green
spaces at five sites, with the goal of reducing urban heat islands,
improving stormwater management, and adding more urban green
space in underserved areas.
Transportation decarbonization:
$965,000 to Oregon Walks for a program to develop more walking school
bus programs in underserved communities, helping students’ health
and safety and reducing traffic congestion around schools by increasing
active transportation options for children.
$310,700 to BikeLoud PDX to expand its “Bike Buddy” program, which
aims to connect experienced volunteers with people who want to start
riding their bikes for transportation in Portland, with the goal of
increasing bicycle usage among underrepresented communities
through connection and mentorship.
$2.2 million to Forth Mobility Fund to increase community electric
mobility in Portland through installing electric vehicle charging stations
at affordable housing sites, helping community organizations electrify
their transportation operations, and more.
A complete list of all 71 approved grants can be found here.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
TriMet Announces Major Service Cuts Starting This Fall
Proposed Detention Center Fee Yields Hostile City Council Meeting
Zenith Energy Legal Fight Highlights Gaps in Portland’s Environmental Guardrails
UPDATED: ICE Violated Portland Policies with Detention Practices, City Leaders Say
Portlanders Say "Yes" to Parks Levy in Early Special Election Results
Portland Mayor Mandates Compliance With Trump Policies in Effort to Retain Federal
Funds
Editors' Picks
Your Mercury 2024 Election Cheat Sheet
THE TRASH REPORT: Women in STEM (Super Toxic Evil Machinations), Plus Celebrity
Smells and Portland's Daddy History
Your SCANDALOUS Local Trivia Quiz About Corrupt OLCC Managers, Cops, Blazers,
Catholics, and (Gasp) So Much More!
POP QUIZ PDX: Test Your Knowledge About Scammed Millionaires, Salty Roads, and Who
Wants to Live In a Jug?
THE BLACK BYLINE: I’ve Never Joined the Naked Bike Ride—But I Won’t Hate on It
Happy 25th Anniversary, Portland Mercury!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286