Home / Planning and Sustainability (BPS) / Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF)
/ Climate Investment Plan: PCEF's five-year funding road map to climate action / News and notices
Applications Open: High Road Advisory Council (HRAC)
PCEF is seeking community and industry leaders to help shape a more inclusive clean-energy workforce
in Portland. If you have experience in trades, contracting, or climate-related work, we invite you to
apply. The application period is open now through Jan. 23, 2026.
Learn more and apply
Groundbreaking Cooling Portland program expands to help more
Portlanders
Contact
News Article
Portland Clean Energy Fund
CleanEnergyFund@portland
oregon.gov
Follow on Social Media
PortlandBPS
PortlandBPS
LinkedIn
YouTube
NextDoor
The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) will
add $10.3 million to the program.
Related
Climate Investment Plan:
Published: December 11, 2024 12:00 pm
PCEF's five-year funding road
map to climate action
Helping even more Portlanders
Cooling Portland: A PCEF-
Portland will dramatically expand its groundbreaking program to reduce funded climate resilience
risk of heatwave deaths over the next two years, the city council decided program
Wednesday, Dec. 11. The Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund
Our community's climate
(PCEF) will add $10.3 million to the Cooling Portland program, allowing it to
justice work: read the latest
help 10,000 additional households through 2026.
stories
Cooling Portland community partners install free portable heat pump
cooling units in the homes of vulnerable residents to protect against
heatwave catastrophes like the one that killed more than 69 Multnomah Community Grants: Funding
County residents and hospitalized dozens more in 2021. Originally, the City opportunities for nonprofits
planned to install 15,000 units over five years. Most of the equipment
The Climate Investment Plan's
installed are efficient, dual-use heat pump units that provide cooling in the
Strategic Programs
summer, as well as heat in the cooler months.
New to PCEF? Start here!
Just a phone call away
PCEF program dashboard
Topics
Equity
Cooling Portland installation.
Cooling Portland's partnership with PDX 311 makes it simple for residents
to connect with the program. “With just a call to 3-1-1, community members
can quickly connect to a wide variety of information and services from their
local government. We take pride in being able to assist residents, regardless
of their language, ability, or resources, with the Cooling Portland program
and other government services,” said Michelle Kunec-North, PDX 311
Program Manager.
This year alone, PCEF and its community partners installed a record 6,000
units, for a total of 13,169 in just three years. Another 6,000 Portlanders
joined a waiting list to get a unit, demonstrating the continued need for the
program. Before Wednesday’s action, the current Cooling Portland budget
would have met initial goals ahead of schedule but could not have
stretched to cover all those on the waiting list.
“We’ve installed a record number of cooling units in each year of Cooling
Portland’s existence,” said Pilar Calderin, Climate Justice Program Manager
at Earth Advantage. “However, we’ve also seen that the need in the
community exceeds the funding level of the program. We’re grateful to the
city council for approving this much-needed expansion so that we can
continue to help provide more Portlanders with the equipment they need
to protect themselves during extreme heat events.”
Safeguarding vulnerable Portlanders from the heat
A county analysis showed that most of those who died during the heat
dome were living alone, over age 60 or had a health condition that made
them vulnerable to the heat. PCEF designed the program to prioritize those
groups.
“With the program’s success, we’ve built a model that can help more people
stay safe from the impacts of heat,” said PCEF Strategic Partnerships and
Policy Manager Jaimes Valdez. “By acting now, the City will be able to
leverage the valuable community partnerships and capacity for installations
over the next two years.”
To qualify, households must earn 60% or less of the area’s median income.
That’s about $71,000 annually for a family of four or $50,000 for an
individual. People with specific vulnerabilities will receive units first.
Portlanders can apply by calling 3-1-1 or by filling out a form online. The
service can also connect applicants with utility programs to help them lower
electricity, gas, and water bills.
Portland voters created the clean energy fund in 2018 with a tax on large
retailers doing business in the city. It supports climate action efforts that
help all Portlanders, particularly communities of color and people with low
incomes.