Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 24, 2024 at 7:30 am
Portland City Council to Mull High-Stakes Gas
Tax Renewal
The 10-cent per gallon Fixing Our Streets gas tax has been an integral part of PBOT's budget since 2016.
It's even more important now.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
PBOT maintenance workers "fixing our streets." PORTLAND BUREAU OF TRANSPORTATION
This morning, Portland City Council will consider the 2024-2028 gas tax
renewal, determining whether or not the 10-cent gas tax for light vehicles
will be on the city ballot this May. The gas tax program, dubbed "Fixing Our
Streets," is critical for funding Portland Bureau of Transportation (PBOT)
street maintenance projects. In 2024, the stakes for renewing the measure
are higher than ever.
Portlanders first approved the Fixing Our Streets tax in 2016, and the
program was renewed in 2020, generating about $150 million for PBOT
services in eight years. Fixing Our Streets has funded services including
street repaving projects, new signal and beacon installation, sidewalk
construction, Safe Routes to School programming, and more. According to
PBOT, the investments in pavement maintenance have saved the city
"hundreds of millions in potential future road reconstruction."
PBOT currently faces a $32 million budget shortfall in the upcoming fiscal
year: a financial future that would mean the end of many of the bureau's
most popular programs, as well as some of its crucial maintenance work
and dozens of jobs. Though leaders at the transportation bureau have
reason to hope a lifeline from the very well-funded Portland Clean Energy
Fund is on its way, the prognosis is still relatively grim. Renewing the Fixing
Our Streets tax is necessary to stave off catastrophe.
Given the program's importance, the current gas tax proposal spent some
time in the incubator before PBOT Commissioner Mingus Mapps
introduced it in December. If renewed by voters, PBOT expects the gas tax
will rake in about $75 million from 2024-2028, which the bureau will divvy
up in three equal parts to fund smoother streets projects (primarily paving
busy and neighborhood streets), safer streets projects (building
infrastructure to improve safety, like installing traffic lights and creating
neighborhood greenways), and community street services (filling potholes,
bike lane upgrades, traffic signal and lighting maintenance, and more).
"We need Fixing Our Streets to help address critical maintenance needs
such as paving our streets and filling potholes," Mapps said at a December
press conference about the proposal. "We need Fixing Our Streets to
address safety needs that can save lives... That's why I'm so excited to bring
this program to City Council. I am confident and hopeful that they will
strongly endorse this and send it to voters for the May election."
Part of the reason PBOT's current financial outlook is so dire is because last
spring, City Council voted to reduce a 40-cent parking fee increase, which
the bureau had been banking on to raise $24 million over five years. Though
Mayor Ted Wheeler wanted to eliminate the increase entirely, citing
declining activity in downtown Portland, Mapps worked out a compromise
to increase the parking fee by only 20 cents.
The saga raised concerns about the current council's resistance to taxing
Portlanders. But considering the Fixing Our Streets measure passed with 77
percent of the vote in 2020, there's good reason to believe the public is fond
of the program.
The gas tax renewal has strong support from community transportation
advocates and members of PBOT's advisory committees.
"In the face of Portland's worst traffic fatality numbers in four decades, and
given the disproportionate risks to pedestrians and the unhoused,
especially in East Portland, the city's shortfall in transportation funding isn't
just a budget issue—it's an urgent public safety emergency calling for
immediate action," Sarah Iannarone, Executive Director of The Street Trust,
said in a PBOT press release. "It's important that voters support this
stopgap effort even as we all work to find more sustainable long-term
solutions for funding safe streets in our city."
A draft letter to City Council from the PBOT Budget Advisory Committee
strongly urges the council to approve the proposal.
"Without this funding, PBOT would face considerable budget deficits,
leading to inevitable service reductions. This would not only hinder our
progress in improving road safety and maintenance but also adversely
affect the well-being and safety of Portland's residents," the letter states.
"Renewing the Fixing Our Streets gas tax is not merely a fiscal decision; it is
a reaffirmation of our commitment as a community to prioritize safety,
accessibility and the proactive upkeep of our city's roads and transport
systems."
City Council will also consider extending the 10 cent heavy vehicle use tax
for another four years at today's meeting. This tax would not need to be
referred to voters and would generate another $10.5 million from 2024-
2028.
You can read the full 2024-2028 Fixing Our Streets draft proposal here. City
Council is expected to hear testimony and cast a vote about the gas tax and
heavy vehicle use tax beginning at 9:45 this morning.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS TRANSPORTATION
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
UPDATE: Judge Extends Restraining Order Blocking National Guard Deployment in
Oregon
“Antifa Hellfire”: Amid Local Uncertainty, White House Attempts to Justify National
Guard Invasion of Portland
It’s Been 10 Years Since Portland Adopted Vision Zero. What’s Changed?
The 'Big Beautiful Bill' is Gutting Oregon’s SNAP Benefits
Sweating Out the Fascism With Anti-ICE Aerobics
State and Federal Losses Stack Up for ODOT’s I-5 Rose Quarter Plan
Editors' Picks
Sassy Trivia Questions About Loudmouth Frat Boys, Annoying TV Hosts, and Local Rich
Dudes Misspending their Moolah!
Good Morning, News: People For Portland's Bullshit Poll, Council to Vote on Criminalizing
Homeless, and Republicans Eat Their Own (Hee-Hee-Hee)
Sassy-Ass Trivia About Shadow Mayors, Local Comic Book Shops, and the Funnest Bar In
Town!
THE TRASH REPORT: Winona Ryder and Good Guys, Meghan McCain and Bad Hair
Weather is Trash, Mark Wahlberg has an App for That, Millennials are Old, and Keiko's
Legacy
Horrifyingly Fun Trivia About Cursed Amusement Parks, Scary Election Candidates, and
Other Homicidal Maniacs
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286