These 51 laws are going to take effect
in Oregon on Friday
These laws are going to take effect on Friday, Sept. 26 — 91 days after the close of the legislative session.
John Tanet
BILLS THAT MADE HEALTHCARE ENERGY AND UTILITIES FORESTRY, WILDLIFE AND HOUSING AN
HEADLINES CLIMATE
Published: 8:03 AM PDT September 16, 2025
Updated: 8:49 AM PDT September 22, 2025
PORTLAND, Ore.
T
he Oregon legislature and Gov. Tina Kotek passed hundreds of bills into law this
year.
Although most of these new laws are going to take effect on January 1, 51 of them
are scheduled to take effect Friday, Sept. 26 — 91 days after the close of the
legislative session.
This list does not include laws filed with the Oregon Secretary of State.
Here's what you should know about how Oregon state law is going to change as the
legislation kicks in:
Costco Shoppers Say This Device
Reduces Knee Pain "Unlike Any
Other"
Health Advice Today
BILLS THAT MADE HEADLINES
HB 3940 — Wildfire funding package features new nicotine pouch tax
This bill addresses how to pay for the rising cost of fighting wildland fires by levying a tax on
nicotine pouches.
The tax is 3.25 cents per individual unit with a flat charge of 60 cents on packages of fewer
than 20 units.
2024 was the most expensive fire season in state history — costing over $350 million — and
left lawmakers split on how to fully fund the Oregon Department of Forestry.
Democratic lawmakers heralded House Bill 3940 as a "significant update to Oregon's wildfire
finance and response system." The bill passed in a bipartisan vote of 37-8, though 13
representatives had excused absences for the vote, primarily among Republicans.
The bill entered the State Senate as something of an all-purpose method of testing wildfire
funding methods, with updates to how rural working lands are assessed, taxed and protected
and a 5-cent surcharge on beverage containers. Ultimately, those methods were dropped in
favor of the oral nicotine tax. It passed the Senate in a bipartisan vote of 20-8 with two
absences for the vote.
Read more
SB 163 — Children of sperm and egg donors have a right to know their donor
This bill allows children conceived from donor sperm, eggs or embryos to gain access to the
names of their respective donor or donors, as first reported by The Oregonian.
At a lengthy 105 pages, the law thoroughly lays out the legal standards for establishing
parentage — similar to other laws giving adopted children the same rights and protections.
As part of the law, clinics are required to ask for the names, addresses, birth dates and
contact information of gamete and embryo donors. That information will then be logged on a
state registry that will be maintained even if the clinic goes out of business. Previously, these
donors were allowed to stay anonymous and records were often lost with the closing of
involved clinics.
Even though the law is taking effect this fall, it's going to be some time before it sees serious
use. Donor-conceived children won't have access to the registry until they turn 18.
Functionally, this means that the registry won't be used until 2043 or 2044.
The bill passed 21-8 in the State Senate with one Democrat and seven Republicans voting
against it. It saw a similar split in the House, passing 41-9 with only Republicans opposing the
bill.
Similar bills have been popping up around the country. Clinics now face increased scrutiny
after it was revealed a few years ago that a Dutch man fathered at least 550 children in
multiple countries.
Read more
HB 2563 — Insurers are now required to explain premium hikes
This bill requires that insurers explain to policy holders why their premium will go up when
their policy is renewed, and even specifies how they're supposed to deliver the news.
The law applies to either homeowner or personal insurance policies. At the policy holder's
request, their insurance provider must "give a clear and reasonable written explanation for
any increase" in the premium. Insurance providers aren't allowed to use technical language
that wouldn't be easily understood by the average policy holder.
Insurers will be required to list up to four of the most significant reasons for the price increase.
Also, it will now be up to the Department of Consumer and Business Services to define when
a factor significantly contributes to a rate hike. This law will only apply to existing policies that
are being renewed, and not to new applications.
Insurance providers will be required to respond within 20 days of the customer's request.
The bill made it through the House almost entirely on party lines, passing 33-22 with no
Republican support and one Democrat voting against it. It only fared slightly better in the
Senate, passing 21-8 with three Republicans voting in favor.
Read more
SB 243 — Banning 'bump stocks'
SB 243 bans "bump stocks" and other rapid-fire activators one can attach to guns. They were
once banned on the federal level, but that ban was overturned by the Supreme Court last
year.
The bill also allows local governments to decide for themselves if they want to bar people
from bringing guns into public buildings, even if that person has a concealed carry permit.
While the bill was still on the floor, Republicans said they could have backed the ban on bump
stocks, but this second part of the bill goes too far. Ultimately, the bill passed both the House
and the Senate on a party-line vote.
Read more
Costco Shoppers Say This Device
Reduces Knee Pain "Unlike Any
Other"
Health Advice Today
HEALTHCARE
HB 2573
This bill revises two laws from 2021 and 2024 by clarifying the legal meanings of long-term
care facility, residential care facility and senior emergency medical services.
It also adds tighter requirements for the Senior Emergency Medical Services Innovation
program and pushes back the end date for that program.
HB 2685
This bill makes it mandatory for Oregon hospitals and birthing centers to give each newborn a
hearing screening test. Smaller facilities are required to at least give parents more information
about the screening and where they can get it done.
In addition, hospitals and birthing centers will be responsible for screening for
cytomegalovirus (CMV) — a disease related to mono that can cause birth defects.
HB 3294
This bill regulates staffing plans for health care providers. One of the most notable changes is
that a direct care registered nurse can only be assigned to one trauma patient at a time, and
no more than five general patients at a time.
HB 3409
This bill clarifies the previous laws and spells out when and how insurance providers can
require a reimbursement claim for certain federally discounted prescription drugs.
HB 3824
Under this bill, physical therapists in Oregon will be allowed to perform dry needling for their
patients, and won't need to get a separate license to use sonographic equipment if it's for
physical therapy.
Physical therapists will also be able to certify a disabled person's parking permit application.
SB 230
Oral healthcare providers will be required to complete an intake screening within 60 days
when someone enrolled in the Veterans Dental Program contacts them.
This bill passed unanimously in both chambers of the state legislature.
Costco Shoppers Say This Device
Reduces Knee Pain "Unlike Any
Other"
Health Advice Today
ENERGY AND UTILITIES
HB 2065
This bill, along with HB 2066, establish a regulatory framework for small-scale power grids
that can operate independently from the main grid known as "microgrids."
HB 2065 in particular lays the groundwork for hiring consultants, getting engineering
evaluations and submitting designs to connect a microgrid to a main power grid.
HB 2066
This bill directs the Public Utility Commission to create rules and frameworks for people to
own and operate microgrids and community microgrids within the service area of electric
companies. It also requires the Department of Consumer and Business Services to establish
rules to support buildings with community microgrids.
Local governments will be able to set their own land use regulations for what areas are
considered microgrid zones.
HB 2095
This bill makes technical corrections to the tax credit granted for research conducted by a
semiconductor company. It's more legal housekeeping than anything that will impact the
average state resident.
HB 3336
Under this bill, power companies will be required to file strategic plans for improving the
power grid where they can afford to do so. Companies are then given until Jan. 1, 2030 to
carry out the plan.
Neuropathy Has Been Linked To a
Common Habit. Do You Do It?
Nerve Health Learn More
FORESTRY, WILDLIFE AND CLIMATE
HB 2072
This bill extends the Forest Products Harvest Tax — a tax on timber harvested from any land in
Oregon — through 2027. You're still required to file harvest returns even if the total volume is
less than the minimum threshold for being taxed.
HB 2081
This bill directs the Oregon Investment Council and the State Treasurer to take action to
mitigate the risks of climate change to the Public Employees Retirement Fund.
HB 2342
This bill increases certain wildlife license, tag and permit fees. The cost of an annual hunting
license for a resident will increase from $34.50 to $39 under the new law. It will then increase
again to $45 in 2030. The last time the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife raised license
fees was 2020.
HB 3630
This bill eliminates the estate tax for farm, forestry and fishing interests owned by trusts and
businesses that are entirely owned by family members of the deceased. It will apply to the
estates of people that died on or after July 1, 2025.
HB 3794
This bill will create the Task Force on Municipal Solid Waste in the Willamette Valley. The
committee will be expected to study and identify solutions for waste disposal in Willamette
Valley, and will be dissolved at the end of 2026.
SB 485
This bill makes it easier for small forestlands to qualify for an exemption from the estate tax
after the owner's death.
HOUSING AND LAND USE
HB 2316
This law will allow for the creation of home start lands on certain state and local properties
within Oregon's urban growth boundaries. It's one approach for the Department of
Administrative Services to address the state's ongoing housing crisis and encourage new
developments.
These home start lands will be exempt from some land use laws, as well as property taxes for
up to five years after purchase and are meant to provide grounds for affordable housing —
especially for first-time homebuyers.
HB 3054
This bill places a cap on the amount by which landlords can increase rent for tenants in
mobile homes or floating homes. There are exceptions in place for if tenants collectively
approve major upgrades.
HB 3145
This bill allows the the Housing and Community Services Department to use Local Innovation
and Fast Track Housing Program Fund money for pre-built homes. The department will also
be required to report on the outcomes of this spending.
HB 3963
The Department of Land Conservation and Development was required to provide a report on
their assessment of offshore wind farm developments by the end of the year. This bill extends
the deadline until Jan. 1, 2027.
SB 48
This bill changes the conditions under which cities can amend their urban growth boundaries.
It also opens the door for cities to pay back loans from the state used for more affordable and
middle housing with revenue sources other than developer fees.
SB 347
Under this bill, land owners won't face a special tax assessment if it is found that marijuana
was grown on their land without their knowledge by the person using said land.
SB 684
This bill will expand the definition of "residential housing" to include some types of mixed-
income housing. The Housing and Community Services Department will also be required to
adopt rules for long-term financing of residential housing by the end of 2026.
LABOR, BUSINESS AND TAXES
HB 2087
This bill expands multiple state tax credits and extends them through 2032.
HB 2321
This bill mandates that the Legislative Fiscal Office analyze and report on the current state
property tax system and options to modernize it by the end of 2026.
HB 2337
This bill allows small businesses to apply for an Oregon Small Business Enterprise
certification, which will let them compete for contracts with the state. It will also direct the
Department of Administrative Services to make a list of targets and goals for small business
contracts across the state.
HB 2339
This bill enacts broad revisions to Oregon’s tax statutes and timber revenue distribution,
including modifying how timber severance tax funds are allocated.
HB 2351
This bill changes how businesses are required to report data from state benefit programs
such as tax exemptions. Proponents of the bill hope it will improve transparency with regards
to Oregon's economy.
HB 2688
This bill increases wages for work done on off-site work for use in public works such as roads,
highways, buildings, etc.
HB 3024
This bill removes the eight-week penalty that disqualified workers from applying for
unemployment benefits if they quit or were fired, later requalify for those benefits. In short,
eligible people can now receive the full 26 weeks of benefits.
SB 99
This bill extends the duration of property tax breaks for helping to clean and redevelop
environmentally contaminated "brownfields" or structures on said brownfields through 2023.
SB 143
This bill changes Oregon's unemployment insurance tax system by increasing the portion of
employer tax rates that goes to the state's fund. It won't impact the annual unemployment tax
rate, it will just change where that money goes.
Costco Shoppers Say This Device
Reduces Knee Pain "Unlike Any
Other"
Health Advice Today
COURTS AND ELECTIONS
HB 2089
This bill creates a program for the former owners of foreclosed property to get any surplus
money after the property is sold by the county to pay off delinquent property taxes.
HB 2677
This bill makes it easier to expunge juvenile criminal records by requiring county juvenile
departments to automatically start the process when the youth turns 18 or completes
probation.
HB 3687
Under this bill, any election to adopt, amend, revise or repeal a county charter will be
determined by a simple majority vote, and supermajority requirements are prohibited.
HB 3825
This bill clears prior court fines for possessing small amounts of marijuana.
SB 578
This bill sets the dates by which time a candidate for office needs to submit their photo and
statement for inclusion in county voter guides. The measure passed unanimously in both
chambers, not counting absences.
SB 580
This bill sets the timeframe that county elections officials have to make a candidate's name
and the office they're running for public.
SB 1173
Under this bill, healthcare providers won't face product liability claims for products that they
provide so long as they weren't involved in designing, manufacturing or selling/leasing that
product.
MISCELLANEOUS
HB 2558
This bill also roughly doubles the Oregon State Marine Board registration fee for all charter
guides and outfitters. The fee increase won't hit until November, but the bill will adjust the
definition of charter guide for clarity when it takes effect Friday.
Annual registration fee for a charter guide will be $500, and the fee for outfitters and other
guides will be $350.
HB 2725
This bill expands the state's Strategic Investment Program so that certain ports will be
included in the decision-making process for larger development projects, and potentially
qualifies them for property tax exemptions.
HB 2728
This bill requires the Public Employee Retirement System to provide retiring members with
overtime data and more information about how overtime hours were used to calculate their
final average salary.
HB 2809
This bill raises the fee to register a newly formulated pesticide to a max of $550 depending
on the chemical's toxicity and potential environmental impact.
HB 3043
This bill defines "monitoring agreement" and "workplace monitor" for purposes of the
impaired health professional program, and allows licensed mental health professionals to
refer themselves to the program.
HB 3045
This bill allows the State Board of Pharmacy to drug test a licensee they're investigating, or
require that person to take a mental, physical or competency evaluation.
SB 789
This bill allows the Oregon Board of Psychology to fine a licensee for the cost of disciplinary
action taken against them.
SB 838
This bill exempts the State Parks and Recreation Department from certain parts of the Public
Contracting Code.
Costco Shoppers Say This Device
Reduces Knee Pain "Unlike Any
Other"
Health Advice Today