Independent. Member-supported. Independent.
donate now
For the Pacific Northwest. Member-supported.
About OPB Public media funding OPB and KMHD events OPB en Español Partnerships Newsletters
As NW faces rolling blackouts, study says
renewable energy may not be enough
By Monica Samayoa (OPB)
Oct. 30, 2025 9 a.m.
According to initial findings of a study, current projections show Oregon and
Washington could face a nearly 3 GW gap by 2030, or the equivalent of
powering about 1.4 million homes.
00:00 / 04:33
Oregon and Washington are falling so far behind on upgrades to the electrical grid that
the states could start seeing rolling blackouts during extreme weather as soon as next
year, according to a preliminary analysis shared at a utility industry and regional power
producers conference this month.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
The findings are stark. By 2030, the gap between what the region is generating and what
people need could reach 9 gigawatts — or the average amount consumed by the entire
state of Oregon. As coal power plants go offline, data centers boot up, and more people
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
switch to electric appliances and vehicles, the grid is strained and there’s not enough
renewable energy projected to come online to fill the gap.
Bonneville Power Administration’s Earl D. Ostrander Substation near Eagle Creek, Jan. 5, 2023.
Kristyna Wentz-Graff / OPB
Because of that gap, the region will need to continue to rely on natural gas for longer
than expected, the analysis found. But the region’s current natural gas pipelines are
already nearing capacity. Gas companies may need to build more pipelines to fuel gas-
fired power plants and keep Northwest lights on. The study has prompted some in the
industry to say electric and gas utilities need to do more to plan appropriately and
coordinate — especially during extreme weather conditions.
“But there are still things that can be done,” said Arne Olson, senior partner with Energy
+ Environmental Economics, known as E3, which conducted the study. The initial phase
of the study was commissioned by 22 electric utilities across the region to look at energy
resources in Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana and portions of Utah and Wyoming.
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
For Oregon and Washington, the gap between how much electricity will be needed in
2030 and how much will be generated is about 3 gigawatts, enough to power about 1.4
million homes, according to the study.
Starting next year, that could lead to planned and controlled shutdowns of power by
utilities when demand is higher than available supply.
But Olsen said those rolling blackouts would happen only on very rare and extreme
occasions, like the January 2024 ice storm that left tens of thousands without power. The
risk is higher when extreme weather conditions happen at the same time as power
generation is reduced due to low hydropower output from the Columbia River and with
low wind and solar production.
FILE - A snowplow clears eastbound Rosa Parks Way towards Vancouver Blvd., Portland, Feb 13, 2021. Extreme cold is
increasingly placing a strain on the Northwest's power grid.
Ann Suckow / OPB
Oregon Public Utility Commission Chair Letha Tawney said E3’s analysis clarifies the
region’s resources and highlights where more attention is needed. The Oregon Public
Utility Commission regulates electric and gas utilities in the state.
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
“It’s a question of, ‘Are the resources there in the hours that we need them?’ And the
study really points to cold winter mornings as the key pinch point for Oregon to
decarbonize,” she said.
Meeting these cold winter morning energy demands already presents multiple
challenges.
The study says the region will have to continue to rely on natural gas until enough
reliable renewable energy sources are added to the grid. But the region’s natural gas
pipelines are already reaching capacity when the weather is extremely cold. Building out
new natural gas plants could take four to five years. The industry has been hit by supply
chain issues that could slow construction, and permitting and siting these projects could
take years.
“I think it’s important to be really nuanced about how to meet the goals and where we
might need to still rely on some gas, and as we layer in the long-term solutions,” Tawney
said.
A strained grid leads to massive energy gaps
Oregon has seen a rapid rise in data centers as well as an increased use of electricity in
homes and businesses. That has contributed to utilities reaching peak demand, when
electricity use is at its highest, more often during extreme weather events. Coupled with
the glacial pace at which new renewable energy is added to the electrical grid, the study
finds the greater Northwest is not prepared for the rising power demand.
For the region to meet that demand, it would need to add four to five times more
resources to the electric grid each year between 2026 through 2030 than it has ever done
before.
“All the things that are necessary to make all this happen just don’t really exist in the
Northwest at this scale,” Olsen said.
And renewable energy sources like wind, solar and batteries have so far made small
contributions to meeting peak winter energy needs, according to the E3 analysis. That’s
because those resources need sunshine or wind to generate energy, and aren’t always
available.
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Because of that, E3’s Olsen said, those resources are “marginally effective” in helping
meet the region’s reliability needs.
“They provide a lot of energy, which is great to reduce fuel costs and to reduce
emissions during most of the year, but when you need them the most, they won’t
necessarily be there, and so the region is reliant on natural gas-fired power,” he said.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
Until renewable energy sources can meet the region’s peak electric demand, natural gas
should remain a source of power, especially for those cold winter mornings, according to
the E3 study.
That could make the region’s electrical grid more reliable when demand surges, but it
also brings the risk that electric bills could climb, Tawney said. Natural gas is a globally
traded commodity, meaning ratepayers are subject to unexpected spikes. The Ukraine
conflict, for instance, doubled its price, Tawney said.
“That has a massive impact on customer bills because customers pay for the fuel,”
Tawney said. “There’s no profit margin on the fuel. It’s a straight pass through to
customers.”
Better coordination between gas and electric utilities
One approach to keeping the lights on and addressing the looming gap between energy
demand and supply would be to require gas and electric companies to plan and
coordinate during severe weather events, energy industry leaders say.
Northwest Gas Association’s CEO Dan Kirschner said right now both gas and electric
companies are operating at capacity levels during extreme weather conditions, and are
becoming increasingly interdependent.
“The grid in our region is leaning more and more on the gas system to ensure reliable,
adequate energy, and it leans on it more and more at the same time that the gas system
is already delivering a huge tranche of energy to the region,” Kirschner said.
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Gas relieves the strain on the electric grid in two ways when cold weather causes demand
to peak: It is used to generate electricity when wind or solar can’t meet the demand, and
it can heat homes and businesses as an alternative to electric heating.
Reliance on natural gas is something that both Oregon and Washington want to move
away from. Both states have aggressive greenhouse gas reduction goals and aim to have
their electric utilities be carbon-free by 2040, which will require moving away from
generating with natural gas, a fossil fuel.
While both states have retired coal plants to meet their carbon reduction goals, they have
not replaced all that lost generation with renewable energy or other sources, adding
more strain to the grid.
Kirschner is calling on lawmakers to create some flexibility around state mandates on
decarbonization – or ending the use of carbon-emitting fuels. Those mandates have often
pushed for a move away from natural gas or gasoline to electric-powered home heating
and vehicles.
“We should be thinking about this more broadly than simply electrification,” he said.
“It’s ‘how do we actually decarbonize’, not electrify, because electrifying isn’t necessarily
decarbonization. It will be eventually. But how do we get there, where we want to go, and
in what time?”
Renewable energy advocate Nicole Hughes agrees that policymakers need to allow
flexibility and gas and electric utilities need to coordinate. Hughes, the executive director
of Renewable Northwest, said the electrical grid is headed into a period of scarcity.
Because of that, the region needs to depend a little longer on natural gas to power our
homes.
“We have been derelict at building energy infrastructure for so many years that we
probably need to maintain the existing fleet of gas plants,” she said.
Hughes said her openness to keeping gas plants operating longer doesn’t change the
long-term goal of transitioning to a carbon-neutral, renewable energy grid.
“It’s how we get there that might need to change, and we’re really excited to be a part of
that conversation and work with the utilities,” Hughes said. “I think there’s a real risk if
we all go into our separate silos and try to work out the problems by ourselves.”
Hughes said the region should be focusing on adding new renewable energy projects
before shifting to more natural gas. But both states have struggled to add these
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
renewable energy resources to the grid and President Donald Trump’s hostility to solar
and wind energy has made pushes to bring renewable sources onto the power grid more
challenging.
Renewable development on a critical timeline
The Trump administration has cut hundreds of millions of dollars in federal funding for
renewable energy and climate action related projects, and tightened timelines for others.
Oregon Gov. Tina Kotek issued an executive order to fast-track solar and wind permits,
in hopes that developers may still be able to take advantage of expiring tax credits.
FILE - More than 2,200 solar panels power the PDX Community Solar project in Northeast Portland, as seen on Aug. 22, 2024.
Monica Samayoa / OPB
For Oregon, that could potentially allow development of about 4 gigawatts of planned
STREAMING NOW
wind and solar energy by 2030.
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
It’s not clear how much Kotek’s order will help, however. As a joint OPB-ProPublica
investigation found, many of the delays in connecting to the regional power grid are
beyond the control of state leaders and are instead due to slow processes controlled by
the Bonneville Power Administration.
“It’s a really critical issue,” Oregon Public Utility Commission Chair Tawney said. “It
was a challenge before all the federal action, it’s a significant challenge now, but
fortunately, Oregon’s been investing and has been sort of on it in terms of paying
attention to the challenge. So I feel better positioned than a lot of places for managing
the new federal challenge.”
E3 expects to release Phase 2 of its study later this year. It will focus on multiple ways
how states can fill the energy gap, including with and without new natural gas
generation, and will look at how states can meet their renewable energy targets.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
📨
Daily news in your
inbox
example@domain.com Sign up
Sign up today for OPB’s “First Look” – your
daily guide to the most important news
and culture stories from around the
Northwest.
Related Stories
How the Pacific Northwest’s dream of green energy fell apart
Oregon and Washington passed aggressive goals to decarbonize their power supply but left it to the
Bonneville Power Administration to build the transmission lines needed for wind and solar. The agency
hasn’t delivered.
May 12, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Taking Gov. Tina Kotek’s temperature on Oregon’s climate
change response
Gov. Tina Kotek talks to OPB about some of the top issues shaping Oregonians' lives today. Here’s
what she told us about the state’s climate progress, how federal funding will affect Oregon’s goals, what
climbing utility rates mean, what the state government can do, and more.
Feb. 4, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon to miss its 2035 greenhouse gas reduction benchmark by
2 years, report says
The Oregon Climate Action Commission’s updated report says the state is delayed in meeting its 2035
carbon reduction goals by two years. The commission is seeking public input through the end of the
month.
Oct. 24, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon governor signs order to boost climate resilience of state
lands and waters
A new directive from Gov. Tina Kotek aims to increase climate resilience and conservation in state-
owned natural lands and waters.
Oct. 23, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon, Washington join multi-state lawsuit challenging EPA
decision to terminate $7B Solar For All grant
The Solar For All program was intended to help lower-income households as well as rural residents get
easier access to rooftop solar at little to no cost. The program also aimed to provide rebates for solar on
multi-family buildings.
Oct. 16, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon to accelerate siting of renewable energy projects to beat
Trump’s incentive deadline
Oregon Gov. Tina Kotek on Monday signed an executive order that seeks to fast-track permitting and
siting for renewable energy projects so developers can take advantage of federal tax credits.
Oct. 6, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon to lose an additional $400 million in federal climate
grants
Oregon and 15 other Democratic states are losing nearly $8 billion toward climate projects, after the
Trump administration terminated multiple federal grants.
Oct. 2, 2025
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon
Oregon is digging deep to tap into an uncommon renewable
energy source — Super Hot Rocks
Mazama Energy along with its partners are hoping to tap into an uncommon energy source that could
help Oregon and the rest of the region meet its renewable energy goals — Super Hot Rocks.
Oct. 6, 2025
Tags: Energy, Natural Gas
Federal funding for public media has been eliminated.
Take action now and protect OPB's independent
journalism and essential programs for everyone.
Make a Sustaining contribution now
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon

About OPB Manage My Membership
Help Center Sponsorship
Work With Us Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
FCC Public Files
FCC Applications
Terms of Use
Editorial Policy
SMS T&C
Contest Rules
Accessibility
STREAMING NOW
Weekend Edition Saturday with Scott Simon