POLITICS
Oregon transportation tax hikes
likely headed to November 2026
ballot for voter decision
Opponents of a transportation package designed to fund road and
maintenance projects say they have more than enough signatures to
refer tax increases to the voters.

Author: Evan Watson
Published: 2:25 PM PST November 27, 2025
Updated: 11:16 PM PST November 28, 2025
SALEM, Ore. — A Republican-led petition effort has reportedly gathered more than 160,000
signatures to refer Oregon's recently passed transportation bill to voters, potentially putting gas
tax and vehicle fee increases on the November 2026 ballot.
Representative Ed Diehl, a leader of the No Tax Oregon campaign, said the petition has so far
collected roughly twice the number of signatures needed — 78,000 — to send the tax
increases to a statewide vote.
Sponsored Links
AllModern Curates Every Style of Modern
Furniture
AllModern has the best of every style of modern design – hand-
vetted for quality. That’s modernmade simple.
ALLMODERN.COM Shop Now
"The people have just had it; they don't want to pay any more taxes," Diehl said. "They don’t
feel like they’re getting their money’s worth for the taxes they already pay."
The signatures still need to be submitted and verified by the Secretary of State's office.
"I don't think there's been a volunteer drive in the history of Oregon that has gathered this
many signatures this quickly," Diehl told KGW.
The transportation bill, a top legislative priority that was passed by Democrats during a special
legislative session, includes increases to the statewide gas tax and vehicle title and registration
fees.
The legislation is designed to address Oregon's aging roads and maintenance problems. Its
passage helped hundreds of state workers avoid layoffs.
"Just to be able to do what we need to do, keep people safe, and keep the road open — I'm so
looking forward to being able to do my job," said Wren Gilson, an Oregon Department of
Transportation worker.
On the day of the bill's passage, Gov. Tina Kotek criticized the referral effort, saying it would
cause problems and fail to address statewide transportation needs.
"Frankly, I would urge Oregonians to think about signing on to a referral that would take away
our basic ability as Oregonians to keep our roads operating," Kotek said at a press conference.
Republicans said they can't support tax increases without reforms and greater accountability for
the Oregon Department of Transportation. They proposed an alternative funding plan that
would take money from public transportation and clean energy projects, among other changes.
Diehl criticized Kotek's delay in signing the transportation bill as a strategy intended to limit the
time opponents had to gather signatures.
He said the quick results in gathering more signatures than petitioners need show momentum
for the campaign.
Tirzepatide Wins For
Weight Loss - Only
$119/Month
Ships to your door. No
insurance required. 3 simple
steps.
FuturHealth
Learn More
"We wanted the volunteers and the voters to know that this is successful, that they are part of
something big and they have something to be thankful for heading into the Thanksgiving
weekend," Diehl said.
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
14 Social Security Changes Coming in 2026 That Impact Everyone (Plus Benefits You
Could Claim Now!)
Social Security is evolving in 2026, and some changes may affect nearly everyone receiving benefits.
DollarPerks|Sponsored Read More
2-Minute App Pays You to Predict What Happens Next
The Prediction Corner|Sponsored
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
FBI says they foiled New Year's Eve terrorist plot in North Carolina
KGW
Mt. Hood Meadows suspends operations Friday and Saturday
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...