Charlotte 45°F
Search the web
Discover News Science Technology Crime Po Personalize
genealogybank.com
Oregon Genealogy - Centuries Of Genealogy
Records - GenealogyBank
1. Search a Family Member's Name 2. Start Your Trial For Unlimited
Access to Archives. Meet the Family Members You've Never Met
Starting With a Simple Search. Start Your Trial!
Learn more
Axios Follow 71.6KFollowers
Sponsored
Kotek signs order to speed up clean
energy in Oregon
1
Story by Kale Williams• 1mo• 2 min read
Kotek signs order to speed up clean energy in Oregon
Gov. Tina Kotek on Wednesday signed an executive order directing
Oregon agencies to accelerate the state's clean energy transition and
cut emissions.
Why it matters: Oregon has some of the nation's most ambitious
climate laws, and this new order builds on that record.
The big picture:Executive order 25-29 will reduce emissions and
make building clean energy projects faster and more efficient to
"deliver more affordable energy for communities across our state,"
Kotek said in a statement.
Driving the news: The order directs state agencies to streamline
clean energy development and remove barriers to siting new
Feedback
projects.
The Oregon Department of Energy will look at barriers to
constructing new clean energy projects and propose a
framework to the legislature to make building easier and faster.
The Department of Environmental Quality will review utility
revenues under the Clean Fuels Program to ensure they're
reinvested in electrification.
Agencies must submit strategies to "streamline and accelerate
clean energy siting and deployment" by September, per the
governor's office.
Between the lines: The order identifies five pathways to guide the
agencies' work, including:
Looking at energy efficiency and clean electricity as ways to
increase electrification while tamping down on carbon
emissions.
Advancing low-carbon fuels like biodiesel for parts of the
economy that are difficult to electrify.
Continue reading
Seekingwaystoincreaseresilienceasgrowingenergydemands
Sponsored Content
verizon.com BeenVerified
myPlan for just $25/line - What Does Your Name
Verizon official site - Save on Mean?
perks
Sponsored Sponsored
More for You
SFGATE·22h Alternet·23h
California mountain highway Year-end upset sp
Bradenton Herald·16h
used by millions 'destroyed' trouble for GOP: a
Sweeping Mamdani agenda hits landlords
by heavy rainfall
150 277 179 35 637 91
CNN·18h The Travel Pug·4d
Minnesota child care centers Historic college towns with
accused of wrongdoing were live music
operating as expected,…
368 477
KRON San Francisco·5h Raw Story·21h Barron's·1h Car and Driver·5h
Democrats rip Trump GOP in panic mode as The oil sector’s biggest Tesla is no longer
administration for strikes on Republicans admit they're winners and losers from in global EV sales
Venezuela: 'Illegal' bombing this key strategy… Venezuela regime change BYD claims the cro
17 5 462 150 33 7 88 9
958
The Associated Press Follow 1.6MFollowers
77 Tesla loses title as world's biggest
electric vehicle maker, AP explains
1d
Tesla lost its crown as the world’s bestselling electric vehicle maker on
Friday as a customer revolt over Elon Musk’s right-wing politics, expiring
U.S. tax breaks to buyers and stiff overseas competition pushed sales
down for a second year in a row.
Sponsored Content
More for You