Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
MERCURY 2025 RECAP
Dec 29, 2025 at 3:00 pm
Mercury 2025 Recap: Environmental
News
The new Portland City Council established a Climate Committee and pushed
back against Zenith Energy, Portlanders fought for Forest Park, and more.
MERCURY STAFF
Oil trains at Portland's Critical Energy Infrastructure hub. TAYLOR GRIGGS
Climate and the new City Council
Portland’s new City Council started grappling with the city’s climate issues
as soon as councilors took office at the beginning of this year. One of the
Council’s first acts of business in January was to establish eight policy
committees—including one focused on environmental and land use issues.
The Council was able to spotlight some underdiscussed environmental
issues—like Portland’s relationship with biofuels and “renewable” natural
gas—through this committee, though it’s unclear what, if any, changes will
result from such conversations.
Zenith under the microscope
Zenith Energy was another major topic of conversation in Portland this
year. Many of the new councilors came into office concerned about Zenith
and other fuel companies based at Portland’s Critical Energy Infrastructure
(CEI) hub on the Willamette River, which pose environmental risks to the
city. Early in the year, former City Administrator Michael Jordan granted
Zenith a new Land Use Compatibility Statement (LUCS), allowing the
company to continue its operations in compliance with state mandates.
The decision came at roughly the same time as several councilors began
making moves to investigate Zenith and the city’s dealings with the
company, displaying the limits of the new Council’s authority over
Portland’s administrative branch.
Fighting for Forest Park
What PGE's project in Forest Park would look like.
PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC
The city also wrestled with Portland General Electric’s (PGE) plan to
construct a major utility project in Forest Park. The plan, which would
require removing around 400 trees from Portland’s largest park, was hated
by many climate advocates, who said PGE didn’t attempt to find alternative
solutions before proposing a Forest Park clearcut. After a city hearings
officer sided with PGE to greenlight the project, opponents appealed. In the
end, Portland City Council unanimously voted against the utility company’s
plan—a relatively rare show of unity among councilors who don’t always
agree, and a win for tree lovers dubious of PGE’s proposal. (Environmental
advocates say it was also a win for species who live in the park, including
Northern red-legged frogs. Portland’s frogs—real and inflatable—came into
the national spotlight this year in other ways, too.)
River love
Chillin' at the Willamette River. TAYLOR GRIGGS
Portlanders gathered at the Willamette River en masse this summer, with
weekly river parties demonstrating how excited people are to embrace a
clean, swimmable river. After a hot stretch, the river saw a toxic algae
bloom, making it briefly unsafe for summer frolicking—the climate crisis in
action, folks. Luckily, a summer rainstorm disrupted the algae bloom, but
advocates continue to emphasize the need to take action to mitigate the
effects of climate change on Portland’s river.
PCEF continues funding climate action (even as Trump
seeks to destroy the earth)
The Trump administration has done serious damage to climate action since
taking office at the beginning of the year. Between clawing back funds for
clean energy projects, firing federal climate researchers, and installing
climate change deniers throughout every sector of government, these
lunatics are really doing everything to hasten humanity’s demise. It won’t be
enough to solve everything, but Portland’s clean energy fund offers a
potential roadmap for taking action in the age of Trump. The Portland
Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) just allocated more than
$60 million toward dozens of local climate projects, ranging from electric
bike incentives to energy-efficient home retrofits.
2026 will be another big year for local climate news. Stay tuned to the
Mercury for more.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: MERCURY 2025 RECAP
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In Mercury 2025 Recap
Mercury 2025 Recap: The Top 10 Most Read Stories of the Year!
Mercury 2025 Recap: Environmental News
Mercury 2025 Recap: Housing and Homelessness
A Moment in a Coffee Shop
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
The Mercury's 10 Favorite Romance (and Romantasy) Books of 2025
Editors' Picks
Sassy-Pants Trivia Qs About Juanita's Chips, the "Best" Pizza in Portland, and What
Should NOT Be Invited Back in 2023!
POP QUIZ PDX: The Biggest (and Most Annoying) Scandals of 2024!
STREET VIEW: “The Bike Lanes That Drive Everybody Crazy”
POP QUIZ PDX: Swarms of Swifts, Embarrassing Escapes, and First-World Ninja
Problems! 🥷
THE TRASH REPORT: 2024—the Year in TRASH
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About the Oregon Ducks, Classic PDX TV, and the Best
Movie of All Tiiiiiiiime!
Popular Articles
Mercury 2025 Recap: Portland City Council's First Year
Mercury 2025 Recap: Housing and Homelessness
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Best Bites of 2025: The Savory, the Sweet, and the Road Trips
The Mercury's 10 Favorite Romance (and Romantasy) Books of 2025
A Moment in a Coffee Shop
The Mercury’s 10 Favorite Movies of 2025
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286