FOR THE EXCLUSIVE USE OF
From the Portland Business Journal:
https://www.bizjournals.com/portland/news/2025/08/08/portland-clean-
energy-jobs.html
SUBSCRIBER CONTENT:
Energy • Sponsored Content by Worksystems
Inside Portland's clean energy growth and
generational workforce challenges
GETTY
By Liza Morehead, Ph.D. – Research and Data Analyst, Worksystems
Aug 8, 2025
The Clean Energy Sector
Clean energy is a growing strength in the Portland regional economy, spanning
eight of the area’s 20 primary economic sectors. It’s especially concentrated in
construction and technical fields, with construction jobs making up 26% of the
sector. Another 21% are split between production occupations (10.8%) and
architecture and engineering roles (10.1%). Between 2009 and 2024, the sector’s
gross regional product more than doubled in our region, growing from $17.3
billion to $41.8 billion, a 142% increase.*
There are two parts to the clean energy transition: increasing the supply of
renewable energy — like solar, wind, geothermal, and hydro — and adapting our
buildings, appliances, vehicles, and industrial systems to use energy efficiently
and sustainably, and reduce potential burdens on the next generation.
In 2024, there were more than 230,000 clean energy jobs in the greater Portland
region, well above the national average of 182,770 for similar-sized cities. Wages in
the region also tend to be higher. The average clean energy wage was $119,000 in
2024, 155% of the regional average wage.*
During the past decade, the sector has added more than 42,800 new
jobs, an increase of 23%.* View more insights on Worksystems’ Economic
Indicator Dashboard.
The Need for a New Generation of Workers
Despite strong growth, the sector faces a workforce challenge. More than one-
fifth of clean energy workers in the region are aged 55 or older and nearing
retirement, while just 8% are between the ages of 14 and 24. Introducing high
school students to clean energy careers could help bridge this gap and ensure a
steady pipeline of new talent.
Pathways for Students and Jobseekers
Oregon high school students will soon benefit from a new federally approved
Career and Technical Education (CTE) pathway. In response Oregon is designing a
CTE pathway in clean energy, connecting students to high-demand careers in
solar, EV infrastructure, energy efficiency and other jobs critical to the clean
energy transition.
The effort is led by CTE Directors Chris Brida (Portland Public Schools) and Madi
Shick (Beaverton School District), with support from the Oregon Department of
Education and the Oregon Clean Energy Workforce Coalition. From the outset,
the program brings together industry, postsecondary, and community partners to
build a scalable, geographically adaptable model. The goal is to equip students for
the clean energy transition and position CTE as a systems-level driver of
economic mobility and workforce innovation.
For adults beyond high school, Worksystems’ Portland Metro Clean Energy Career
Coaching program offers a path into clean energy jobs. Made possible primarily
by the Portland Clean Energy Fund, the program supports jobseekers interested
in contributing to the clean energy transition. Participants are matched with
dedicated career coaches who help them prepare for and pursue careers in
climate-critical industries and occupations.
Career coaches are based at seven trusted community organizations: Central City
Concern, IRCO, POIC, SE Works, Our Just Future, The Urban League of Portland,
and Latino Network. Participants can access a range of supports, including
funding for tuition and training-related costs, work tools and clothing,
wraparound services, and employment connection support through WorkSource
Portland Metro’s On-the-Job Training program.
To read the full Clean Energy Sector report or learn more about career coaching,
visit https://worksystems.org/clean-energy/ or reach out to Daryl Lambert,
construction sector lead, at dlambert@worksystems.org.
Worksystems, the Portland Metro Workforce Development Board, is designated
by the governor in partnership with local elected leaders to invest, coordinate
and manage resources to improve the quality of the workforce in the city of
Portland, Multnomah and Washington counties. Worksystems’ mission is to
coordinate a regional workforce system that supports individual prosperity and
business competitiveness.
*According to Lightcast