Try 1-on-1 Language Learning
AmazingTalker connects you with top language tutors
from around the world!
AmazingTalker Visit Site
THE STORY
City layoffs loom as Portland mayor
releases his proposed $8.54 billion
budget
The mayor's budget makes new investments in homeless shelter
services and public safety, but relies on upcoming staffing and service
cuts, as well as higher fees.

Author: Jared Cowley (KGW), Blair Best, Jamie Parfitt
Published: 2:12 PM PDT May 5, 2025
Updated: 6:46 PM PDT May 5, 2025
PORTLAND, Ore. — Portland Mayor Keith Wilson unveiled his proposed 2025-26 budget on
Monday, which provides more funding for public safety, homelessness, city cleanup and climate
change, while eliminating select staff positions, including a 12% cut to his own office, and $9.5
million in other citywide reductions to help account for a $93 million budget shortfall.
Sponsored Links
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features.
Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly Learn More
That budget shortfall was the culmination of several factors, according to City Administrator
Mike Jordan. Pandemic-era federal funds are finally tapped out, while programs established to Dexcom - Sponsored
address homelessness over the past few years have added considerably to the city's list of An easier way to manage diabetes
expenses. At the same time, property tax revenues — particularly from commercial buildings Discover More
that have shed tenants — have been on the decline.
By the numbers
Here's a look at how Wilson's office breaks down his proposed $8.54 billion budget by service
area:
Public works: $4.73 billion
Community and economic development: $1.3 billion
City operations: $1.02 billion
City administrator's office: $847 million
Public safety: $604 million
City Council: $21.1 million
Office of the City Auditor: $13.9 million
Office of the Mayor: $3.5 million
$90.00
Cuts and fee increases
Because the city is facing a $93 million shortfall in the city's general fund, Wilson said he's
proposing a 12% cut to his own office, targeted staff reductions, and $9.5 million in citywide
reductions.
Some 186 jobs, including vacant positions, are on the chopping block. A third of those are from
Portland Permitting and Development, and 14 positions will be cut from Parks and Recreation.
"I hate layoffs, and I noted this at my state of the city, and I've always fought like hell — no
matter what organization I've been at — because when you have layoffs, you have culture
change," Wilson said, "and it is so important to keep that culture intact, and the trust that comes
with it. We will minimize those layoffs as much as possible."
Wilson's budget does not rely on new taxes, but it proposes fee increases for parking, parks,
permitting, water/sewer/stormwater utility, rideshare and short-term rentals "in line with peer
cities." Those rate hikes include a 25% increase to parking fees, an 8% hike to water bills and a
5% increase to sewer and stormwater bills.
Born Before 1977? You
Could Get Up To $300
Just For Opening a…
Sign up in minutes and earn a
cash bonus when you make
eligible deposits
Forbes
Learn More
Wilson said he's focused on cutting inefficiencies across the city, and his budget relies in part
on a previously announced cut to "core services" of 20% over the next year, slashing
administrative areas like communications, engagement, equity, human resources, technology,
procurement, and budget and finance practice.
"It is time for Portland to follow a 'back to basics' approach on fiscal responsibility and long-
term sustainability," Wilson said. "I have explored every avenue to blunt the impact of the
coming budget reductions. There are no easy answers when facing an unprecedented shortfall
in our general fund."
During a press briefing on Monday, Wilson acknowledged that in some areas this budget
represents kicking the can down the road, as it still relies on considerable one-time funds
which may not be available for the next budget cycle.
Public safety
Wilson's budget proposes $19.5 million in additional funding for public safety and emergency
response services, including fire, police, Portland Street Response and emergency
preparedness systems. Portland Street Response will expand by 14 full-time positions.
The mayor said there have been ongoing issues with response times and crime, and said his
budget will help rebuild the city's public safety infrastructure.
"Our fast-declining homicide rate isn't a sign that our violence interrupters or police are no
longer needed, it shows they're working as intended," Wilson said. "That said, our response
times, human trafficking crimes, and theft rate remain at unacceptable levels, and the $19.5
million I propose we add to fire, PSR, Community Health Assess and Treat Teams, and law
enforcement funding reflects the need to turn the tide on the issues we face."
Homelessness response
Wilson said he'll raise $24.9 million of outside funding to open up 1,500 new shelter beds by
Dec. 1, which will be supported by day centers and storage units. At least $15 million of that
funding had already been secured through the Metro regional government, and Wilson said
Monday that the state of Oregon had committed to funding the balance.
Professionals Use This To
Improve Their Emails
79% of users say Grammarly
Pro makes their work more
polished and professional.
Grammarly
Learn More
He also said his budget will continue to support eight temporary alternative shelter sites across
the city. He also plans to fund 50 shelter beds at the Bybee Lakes Hope Center at a cost of $1.3
million.
"Every dollar we spend on unsheltered homelessness must restore quality of life for all, reduce
the burden on our public safety system, and unlock Portland’s true economic potential," Wilson
said.
READ MORE: Portland mayor and Oregon governor propose waiving fees to spur housing
production
Climate change
Wilson's budget includes $11.9 million for energy-efficient mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
systems, $5 million to transition the city’s fleet from diesel and gasoline vehicles to electric
models, and $12.3 million to support green technology workforce development programs at
Portland Community College.
"With rising temperatures and more extreme weather, we have an urgent responsibility to meet
our commitment to a cleaner, greener, more equitable, lower-carbon city," he said.
City cleanup and livability
Wilson also proposes $2.5 million in his budget for removal of derelict RVs across the city, and
a boost in funding for graffiti removal and street and sidewalk cleaning. The Environmental
Management Office will receive more funding to help it address illegal dumping and
abandoned vehicles. Wilson said this addresses specific issues cited by residents as those that
negatively impact livability in the city.
"Homelessness was identified as our community’s most pressing issue by over 85% of
respondents, followed by cost of living and public safety," Wilson said. "Accordingly, these
community livability issues should continue to remain a key priority for our region."
Livability extends to transportation, and Wilson said he wants to double the city's investment in
pothole repairs, adding nearly $1.5 million to that program.
Apply for loan today pay over time with
allotments
Kashable Apply
Parks and recreation
The budget protects community centers and youth programming, Wilson said, and that's
achieved by cuts to the parks budget. He said they'll take a "back to basics" approach to parks
funding, reducing underutilized building hours, nonessential property upkeep and other
maintenance, arborist hours, and facilities cleaning. He said the city will also increase golf fees,
sell or share expensive, low-mileage vehicles and reduce staff to close the funding gap and
keep community centers open and youth programming accessible.
"Every cent that goes into youth programming and community spaces activates volunteers,
frees up parents to provide for their families while knowing their children are safe, and changes
young lives," Wilson said.
But city Councilor Steve Novick, in a response to Wilson's budget, criticized the mayor as
relying too heavily on cuts to normal park maintenance — something that a recent survey
suggests would be unpopular with Portlanders.
"I am concerned that the Mayor focuses his cuts on Parks, specifically outdoor parks
maintenance. Services affected include removing hazards (such as hypodermic needles and
broken glass) and offensive graffiti, restroom cleaning, trash pickup, maintenance of sports
fields, and playground repairs," Novick said, in part. "That’s not in alignment with Portlanders’
priorities.
"A recent scientific poll showed that Portlanders would rather cut police and community centers
than parks maintenance. And, as former Parks Director Zari Santner has pointed out, if you start
letting maintenance go, it becomes much more expensive to restore the parks to their prior
condition."
Parks maintenance has evolved into a chronic problem for the city of Portland, as a lack of
stable funding has contributed to a list of deferred repairs that was over a thousand items long
as of a 2023 KGW investigation, with repairs estimated at the time to cost a combined total of
$615 million.
Apply for loan today
pay over time with
allotments
Sponsored By Kashable
Affordable Loans Now Included In
Your Benefits Package
Apply
AUDIT: Portland's maintenance backlog grows $1B a year due to historic underinvestment
Novick also pointed out that the budget relies heavily on one-time funds which will be nigh-
impossible to replace as early as next year.
Another city councilor, Mitch Green, identified parks as an area of concern. He proposed using
the Portland Clean Energy Fund to protect "one of the best things Portland has going for it," but
Wilson said explicitly on Monday that he opposed raiding the PCEF for unrelated projects.
Green will present his plan Wednesday, which is when Portland City Council will hold its first
work session on Wilson's budget proposal. It will be up to the council to critique, take public
feedback and ultimately pass the budget.
This is a developing story and may be updated with more details as they emerge.
PPoorrttllaanndd mmaayyoorr ddiissccuusssseess pprrooppoosseedd $$88..5544 bbiilllliioonn bbuuddggeett
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
OHSU study finds CBD-only products don't relieve pain
KGW
LIVE: KGW News at 5:30 p.m.
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...