-49% -70% -66%
LOCAL NEWS
City to close Northeast bridge for 2
-28% -28% -31%
years starting Aug. 4 to build
earthquake-ready replacement
-28%
A major Northeast Portland bridge will shut down for two years of
construction starting Aug. 4 as the city builds an earthquake-resistant
replacement.
AAdd 11 ooff 11

 00:00/00:00 x 
IN OTHER NEWS
Man accused of Safeway
stabbing linked to 2017 MA
train platform attack
Credit: Andy - stock.adobe.com
Author: Sabinna Pierre
Published: 10:14 PM PDT July 15, 2025
Updated: 10:14 PM PDT July 15, 2025
PORTLAND, Ore. — The Northeast 42nd Avenue Bridge over Northeast Lombard Street will be
closed for two years starting Monday, Aug. 4, for reconstruction, according to a statement from
the Portland Bureau of Transportation (PBOT).
PBOT said the Cascade Bridge will build the earthquake-ready replacement bridge, which will
improve freight access and connect pedestrians and cyclists to the Northeast Holman
Neighborhood Greenway and Northeast 47th Avenue multi-use path.
The nearest alternative routes for car traffic will be Northeast 33rd Avenue, Northeast 60th
Avenue and Cully Boulevard, but PBOT said they cannot handle the longest or heaviest tractor-
trailers.
PBOT will post freight detour signs directing northbound trucks east on Northeast Killingsworth
Street to Northeast 82nd Avenue, then north to Northeast Columbia Boulevard. Southbound
freight will go east on Northeast Columbia Boulevard to Northeast Cully Boulevard, then south
to Northeast Killingsworth Street.
No bike detour will be posted because there is no bike lane on the current bridge.
Northeast Lombard Street will close for three weekends during construction. Dates have not
been scheduled.
The bridge carries about 5,000 daily vehicle trips and connects Northeast Portland to Portland
International Airport and other destinations.
PBOT will host a virtual project update on July 31, from 6 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. Registration is
available here.
The $25 million project is funded by $6 million in PBOT System Development Charges, $4
million from the Heavy Vehicle Use Tax and $1 million from the Portland Clean Energy
Community Benefits Fund, PBOT said.
The Portland City Council approved the Heavy Vehicle Use Tax in 2016 and 2020, collected on
businesses delivering goods within city limits. Revenue funds PBOT's Fixing Our Streets
program along priority freight routes.
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
AllModern Curates Every Style of Modern Furniture
AllModern has the best of every style of modern design – hand-vetted for quality. That’s modernmade
simple.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
AllModern Is Making Modern Furniture Shopping Simple
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.* *Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
BREAKING: Is Illinois in an SEC Battle for THIS Quarterback? | Penn St Preview | Illini
Podcast
KGW
Two homeless shelters in Multnomah County set to close in 2026
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...