-49% -70% -66%
GOOD ENERGY
Buying an electric vehicle? Oregon
-49%
DEQ's EV rebates program starts
soon
-49%
Oregon's Clean Vehicle Rebate Program has issued more than 33,000
rebates since 2018. EVs now make up 3% of total vehicle registrations.
Author: Chris McGinness
Published: 7:53 AM PDT April 25, 2025
Updated: 7:53 AM PDT April 25, 2025

PORTLAND, Ore. — Electric vehicles are a small, but growing segment of Oregon's car market
that's helping reduce greenhouse gas emissions and fuel costs for drivers. The Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality will soon restart a program that could help more people
buy EVs.
Oregon now has over 112,000 registered electric vehicles — about 3% of all cars, trucks and
SUVs on the road. With transportation responsible for roughly 30% of the state’s greenhouse
gas emissions, the push toward EVs remains a major part of Oregon’s climate strategy.
Still, for many potential buyers, concerns about charging access and driving range remain
barriers. In Salem, Joshua Lowe and Seirra Norquist are among the growing number of
Oregonians who’ve made the switch. The couple shares both a hybrid and a fully electric
vehicle, and they’re loving the experience.
“Ten out of 10 would recommend everyone to get one,” Norquist said. “I love it. Way better gas
mileage, the comfort, the ease and the maintenance.”
Norquist’s commute frequently tops 80 miles a day, so reliable access to fast-charging stations
is important. Oregon currently has nearly 4,000 public charging ports across more than 1,500
locations, including over 1,000 DC fast chargers, which can recharge a battery from 20% to
80% in 20 minutes. Even as federal EV infrastructure funding hits pause, the state is moving
ahead with plans to build out fast charging corridors along Interstate 5, U.S. 97 and Interstate
205, aiming for stations every 50 miles or less.
Credit: KGW
For those who can’t charge at home, Oregon’s Community Charging Rebates Program is open
through mid-June. It helps fund charging stations at apartment buildings, workplaces and public
lots.
For those with access to home charging, installation can be simple and affordable. “It wasn’t
that expensive,” Lowe said. “Your local electrician can probably come on out... it’s kind of a
must unless you have another place to charge.”
Their charger costs about $200, and Norquist said they haven’t noticed a spike in their electric
bill. Many Oregon utilities offer residential charger rebates of up to $500.
Electric vehicles also bring big savings over time.
“For right now the deal is quite good,” said Steven Hershkowitz, the Clean Transportation
managing director within the Washington State Department of Commerce. “You’re going to
save somewhere in the realm of $1,500 a year in fuel costs.”
EVs are about three times more energy efficient than gas-powered cars and electricity is
cheaper than gasoline.
More support is on the way. The Oregon Clean Vehicle Rebate Program is preparing to reopen
later this spring, offering up to $7,500 in rebates for qualifying new or used EVs. The DEQ will
announce the purchase window soon, likely sometime later in May. Since 2018, the program
has awarded more than 33,000 rebates, totaling over $100 million.
And if anyone still thinks electric cars are slow? Think again.
“You see some of these things beating Lambos off the starting line,” Lowe said. “It’s almost too
much power.”
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Professionals Use This To Improve Their Emails
79% of users say Grammarly Pro makes their work more polished and professional.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Two homeless shelters in Multnomah County set to close in 2026
KGW
Legacy providers vote to ratify first contract, capping nearly month-long strike
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...