Independent. Member-supported. Independent.
donate now
For the Pacific Northwest. Member-supported.
About OPB Public media funding OPB and KMHD events OPB en Español Partnerships Newsletters
SCIENCE & ENVIRONMENT
3 Portland councilors propose PCEF tax hike
to backfill city budget
By Monica Samayoa (OPB)
April 3, 2025 7:54 p.m. Updated: April 4, 2025 7:02 p.m.
Raising the Portland Clean Energy Fund tax could generate $60 million for
non-climate programs
Three Portland city councilors have proposed a tax increase on retailers to help fill gaps
in the city’s $93 million budget gap.
On Thursday, councilors Steve Novick, Jamie Dunphy and Angelita Morillo, proposed
increasing the Portland Clean Energy Fund’s 1% tax on large retailers to 1.33% and
directing those additional funds to the general fund.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
In late February, City Administrator Michael Jordan released recommendations about
how to balance the funding gap. He proposed significant cuts to the transportation
bureau, to park services and summer programs and the elimination of nearly 300 jobs
STREAMING NOW
acrosLsiv ael Wl ciriet!y bureaus. The city government is facing significant financial shortfalls due
to factors including inflation, expiring pandemic-era federal funds and spending tied to
public labor union contracts.
FILE - Portland City Administrator Michael Jordan, second from right, at a City Council meeting, Feb. 5, 2025, Portland, Ore.
Jordan outlined the city's budget situation in a meeting Feb. 28, 2025.
Anna Lueck for OPB
Jordan also proposed moving about $19 million of the Clean Energy Fund’s generated
interest to the city’s general fund to fill some of Portland’s gaps. Generated interest
refers to revenue PCEF receives simply by earning interest on its vast savings account.
But Novick said in a statement Thursday that councilors heard from hundreds of
Portlanders that those cuts to city programs are “unacceptable”.
“And yet, to balance the budget, the Mayor and Council would have to cut much more,”
his statement said. “Since the vast majority of the General Fund goes to police, fire,
parks and homeless services, it seems unavoidable that those services are at risk. Faced
with those choices, we feel it is incumbent on us to put an alternative on the table for
consiSdTReErAaMtINiGo NnO.W”
Live Wire!
The proposed increase on city retail sales could generate more than $60 million a year
for the general fund.
Related: Portland’s climate action fund could double spending over the next five years
The three city councilors who pitched this additional tax on large retailers also propose a
cut to the business licensing fee that freelancers and small businesses pay in Portland.
Presently, any business that generates $50,000 in sales or more per year must pay that
fee. That would rise to $100,000 in sales or more per year. Although this would reduce
one form of revenue for the city, the tax cut to smaller businesses would be offset by the
increase in the PCEF tax on large retailers, a staffer for Dunphy’s office said.
“Raising the small business license fee exemption to $100,000 gives real relief to the
independent contractors, startups, and family-run shops that keep Portland’s economy
moving,” Dunphy said in a statement. “This change is about fairness — and it’s funded
in a way that protects the parks, public safety, and essential services that Portlanders
count on every day. We’re making sure big corporations pay their fair share so our city
can keep working for everyone.”
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
FILE - PDX Community Solar is a more than 2,200 panel project, located in Northeast Portland, aimed at helping lower
helping energy bills for low-income qualified Cully neighborhood residents. The PDX project is funded through a grant of
more than $4 million awarded to Verde from the Portland Clean Energy Fund.
Monica Samayoa / OPB
According to the proposal, the additional 0.33% tax on sales would be directed to the
general fund, “leaving Portland’s investment in PCEF intact.”
Novick said the tax increase was pitched to give city leaders an option to consider, in
advance of Mayor Keith Wilson’s budget proposal on May 7.
“If Mayor Wilson presents a balanced budget without unacceptable cuts to public
services, I’ll be happy to pull this measure,” Novick said. “But if not, then I believe
adding new revenue should be a part of the conversation.”
Deputy City Administrator Donnie Oliveira said PCEF remains committed to the
Climate Investment Plan and “any proposed changes to the existing revenue structure
will be deliberated by City Council.
To increase the PCEF tax rate and redirect those additional dollars to the general fund
would require a majority vote from city council.
Related: Portland city commissioner proposes $540M of climate action funds toward city bureaus
A history of diverting PCEF funds
This is not the first time the fund has been eyed by city councilors to backfill the general
fund.
The Portland Clean Energy Fund is a first of its kind justice and climate program aimed
at reducing greenhouse gas emissions while advancing racial and social justice, and was
created by voters.
It’s funded through a 1% tax on the retail sales of large companies in the city. Since its
inception in 2019, revenue has repeatedly exceeded forecasts. Initial estimates calculated
the fund would raise $40 million to $60 million each year. The tax surcharge has instead
generated hundreds of million more than anticipated — $1.5 billion more.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
The money is used to fund a range of climate-related projects, including energy-efficient
retrofits, renewable energy development, and job training in the construction and energy
fields.
Before the city transitioned to a new form of government this January, the PCEF
windfall prompted former city councilors and the former mayor to bring forth several
proposals to filter some of that money toward direly underfunded city bureau budgets.
That included a proposal from former Commissioner Carmen Rubio, which revamped
the climate action fund and created a five-year Climate Investment Plan which included
$540 million to city bureaus. That proposal passed and those city bureaus are now
receiving more than $740 million over the next five years.
A screen shot of the Portland Clean Energy Fund's updated spending March 2025.
The Portland Clean Energy Fund / The Portland Clean Energy Fund
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Last July, former Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler transferred $7.6 million from the PCEF’s
generated interest to the general fund. It was the first time the city diverted money from
the fund for programs not directly tied to climate response.
That same proposal to backfill the general fund with PCEF interest is up again — this
time nearly $19 million of the fund’s generated interest could be up for grabs.
Related: Portland to transfer more than $7 million from city’s climate action fund to general
budget
Awards to city projects tied to climate goals
During last week’s Climate, Resilience, and Land Use Committee, co-chaired by Novick
and Morillo, members heard from city and PCEF staff about how much the climate
fund has generated, what has been allocated and what has been spent.
In December, PCEF awarded $300 million to eight large-scale projects, to be paid over
the next five years. PCEF staff said they received more than $2.4 billion worth of
proposals. Within that specific funding allocation, the Portland Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability is set to receive $20 million, the Portland Bureau of Transportation will
receive $20.5 million and $41 million is set to go to the Portland Bureau of Fleet and
Facilities.
Committee member Councilor Candace Avalos said she was deeply concerned about
how much money is being diverted to city bureaus rather than local community
organizations.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
FILE- Portland City Hall, Nov. 15, 2024.
Kristyna Wentz-Graff / OPB
Avalos said city bureaus are “historically underinvesting in front-line communities.”
Those “front-line communities” that PCEF aims to serve include low-income
communities, communities of color, and other groups especially hard-hit by climate
change.
“The city needs to continue to hold itself accountable to how it is making those
decisions and that it has community in mind,” Avalos said during the meeting.
She called for more accountability about how exactly PCEF’s city bureau money is
being spent and said city leaders should ensure that spending is connected back to “the
original mission in ensuring that communities are the focal voice.”
The Climate, Resilience and Land Use Committee plans to discuss the proposal to
increase the PCEF tax to assist with city budget needs during an April 10 meeting.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Related: Portland’s climate action fund awards $300 million to large-scale projects
PCEF promises when running for office
During their campaigns for City Council seats, Morillo, Novick and Dunphy were asked
by OPB and the Oregonian/OregonLive.com if they supported putting the Portland
Clean Energy Fund back on the ballot and what, if any changes would they support.
Each candidate said they did not support putting the tax back in front of voters and they
suggested changes, including using it to assist with the general fund.
Dunphy’s candidate questionnaire said: “I believe that it should be protected. We should
use PCEF to reframe how we spend general fund dollars to maximize the benefits of this
program. It cannot be treated as a slush fund or a general purpose sales tax.”
Morillo’s said: “We need to implement the will of the voters as they originally intended. I
will only support changes to the fund where the money will continue to be used to
address the effects of climate change that primarily affect communities of color.”
Novick answered: “PCEF needs to start rigorously evaluating which projects most
effectively reduce emissions and help low-income people. Transportation is the biggest
source of emissions and a big expense for low-income people, so projects like 82d
Avenue Bus Rapid Transit should be a priority.”
Correction: Due to an editing error, a previous version of this story misstated details around
proposed taxes and fees under PCEF. The proposal three Portland councilors have put forward
would remove a city licensing fee for small businesses making less than $100,000. OPB regrets
the error.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
📨
Daily news in your
inbox
example@domain.com Sign up
Sign up today for OPB’s “First Look” – your
daily guide to the most important news
and culture stories from around the
Northwest.
Related Stories
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland’s climate action fund could double spending over the
next five years
The proposed amendments to Portland Clean Energy Fund’s five-year $750 million plan could double
its spending to more than $1.5 billion. But the fund’s committee members are asking for a more
transparent process for city-led proposals.
Dec. 6, 2024
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland city commissioner proposes $540M of climate action
funds toward city bureaus
The Portland Clean Energy Fund is a climate action program created to address impacts of climate
change on communities of color and others most likely to need assistance.
Dec. 13, 2023
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland to transfer more than $7 million from city’s climate
action fund to general budget
Commissioners approved a $7.6 million transfer from the Portland Clean Energy Fund to the city's
general budget, marking the first time the climate action funds will be used outside of their voter-
approved purpose.
July 15, 2024
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland’s climate action fund awards $300 million to large-scale
projects
The Portland Clean Energy Fund has now allocated more than $740 million to city bureaus, roughly
half of its overall spending.
Dec. 18, 2024
Tags: Portland City Council, Clean Energy
Federal funding for public media has been eliminated.
Take action now and protect OPB's independent
journalism and essential programs for everyone.
Make a Sustaining contribution now
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!

About OPB Manage My Membership
Help Center Sponsorship
Work With Us Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
FCC Public Files
FCC Applications
Terms of Use
Editorial Policy
SMS T&C
Contest Rules
Accessibility
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!