NATION WORLD
Trump moves toward deal to give
US an equity stake in company
developing Nevada lithium mine
The proposed $2.3 billion federal loan could allow the project to move
forward to extract the silver-white metal used in electric vehicle
batteries.
Credit: Rick Bowmer, File, AP
FILE - Construction continues at the Lithium Nevada Corp. mine site Thacker Pass project, April 24, 2023, near
Orovada, Nev.
Author: MATTHEW DALY (Associated Press)
Published: 1:01 PM PDT September 27, 2025
Updated: 1:01 PM PDT September 27, 2025
WASHINGTON D.C., DC — The White House is moving forward with a deal that would allow the
U.S. government to take a small equity stake in a Canadian company that is developing one of
the world's largest lithium mines in northern Nevada, an official said.
The Department of Energy and Lithium Americas, developer of the proposed Thacker Pass
lithium mine and processing plant about 200 miles north of Reno, have agreed on changes to a
$2.3 billion federal loan that could allow the project to move forward to extract the silver-white
metal used in electric vehicle batteries. General Motors has pledged more than $900 million to
help develop Thacker Pass, which holds enough lithium to build 1 million electric vehicles
annually.
Sponsored Links
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To
Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine Learn More
AAdd 11 ooff 11

The proposed equity stake in Vancouver-based Lithium Americas is the latest example of
President Donald Trump's administration intervening directly in private companies. The  00:00/00:00 x 
government is getting a 10% stake in Intel through the conversion of billions in previously
granted government funds and pledges. The administration spent $400 million of taxpayer IN OTHER NEWS
money in July on MP Materials stock to make the U.S government the biggest owner in the Las
Man accused of trying to m
Vegas rare earths miner. Trump also made a deal with Nvidia and AMD to give the U.S.
child at Metzger Park to pa
government a 15% cut of revenue from selling certain chips to China.
for sex
A White House official declined to specify the size of the U.S. stake in Lithium Americas, but
said it would be “very small” — less than 10% — and serve as “a cash buffer” for the company.
Lithium Americas asked the Energy Department to restructure the federal loan, which
was approved last year by the Biden administration.
“We support the project moving forward,'' said the White House official, who was granted
anonymity in order to talk about a deal that is not yet completed.
“Critical minerals like lithium are very important' to boost the U.S. economy and restore
domestic manufacturing," the official said, adding: “We're trying to do this in a way that is fair to
the taxpayers. We don't believe in free money.”
A spokesman for Lithium Americas declined to comment, but the company said in a statement
that it is in discussions with DOE and General Motors regarding the DOE loan.
“The topics of these discussions include certain conditions precedent to draw on the DOE Loan
and associated loan specifics, as well as incremental requests from the DOE for potential
further conditions” to gain access to the loan, the statement said.
Jim Cain, a GM spokesman, said Friday the company remains “confident in the project” but
declined to comment on ongoing negotiations.
___
Complete the
Look with this Sale
$549.99 $169.99 $999.99
Ashley Furniture Buy with PayPal
Thacker Pass is considered crucial to building a domestic supply chain to make batteries for
electric vehicles and other electronics. It also represents a rare point of agreement between
Trump and former President Joe Biden. Both Republicans and Democrats support the mine
project as a way to boost American critical minerals production and cut reliance on China, the
world’s largest lithium processor.
Thacker Pass is expected to produce 40,000 metric tons of battery-quality lithium carbonate
per year in its first phase, enough to help power 800,000 EVs.
Environmental groups and leaders of three tribes spent years fighting the mine, which they say
borders the sacred site of a massacre of more than two dozen Native Americans in 1865.
The DOE under Biden backed the project as a way to help mitigate climate change
by speeding the shift away from fossil fuels.
Trump has aggressively moved away from confronting climate change, labeling it “ the greatest
con job ever perpetrated on the world ” in a speech this week at the United Nations. “If you
don’t get away from the green energy scam, your country is going to fail," Trump told world
leaders on Tuesday.
The bid to boost the lithium project comes as the pace of U.S. electric vehicle sales has slowed
as the industry struggles to attract mainstream buyers who remain concerned about charging
infrastructure and affordability.
A law approved by congressional Republicans and signed by Trump is likely to deal another
blow to EV adoption. The massive tax law approved this summer phases out federal incentives
for new and used EV purchases, effective at the end of the month.
Consumers rushed to dealer lots this quarter to take advantage of the credits before the phase-
out takes effect. The credits have saved car buyers up to $7,500 off the cost of their EV.
Without the incentives, many automakers will struggle to make sales.
Besides batteries for cars, cell phones and other electronics, lithium is also used in the
manufacture of glass, chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Lithium batteries are also used to store
wind and solar power.
___
Associated Press writer Alexa St. John in Detroit contributed to this report.
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Multnomah County deputies arrest man
accused of ramming patrol cars Discover
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Dementia and Memory Loss Has Been Linked To this Common Food - Do You Eat It?
Brain Defender|Sponsored Click Here
Men Can’t Get Enough of This Cozy Shirt
The shirt that looks effortlessly cool and feels unbelievably soft — no wonder it’s becoming every man’s
favorite.
Walkergrey|Sponsored Shop Now
I always get compliments when I wear this top
Last day of discounts
Findbestes™|Sponsored Shop Now
Judge orders ICE detainee released on the spot after learning he was arrested without
a warrant
KGW
Missing 4-year-old Alabama boy found dead; father arrested on explosives, chemical
endangerment charges
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...