Dexcom - Sponsored
An easier way to manage diabetes Discover More ⌃
NATION WORLD
EPA head says he'll roll back
Edema Is Not From Salty Food. Mee
the Real Enemy of Swollen Legs.
dozens of environmental
FootRenew Learn Mo
regulations, including rules on
climate change
The United States is the second largest carbon polluter in the world,
after China, and the largest historical emitter of greenhouse gases.
AAdd 11 ooff 11
IN OTHER NEWS
Man accused of Safeway
stabbing linked to 2017 MA
train platform attack
Credit: Rebecca Droke/Pool Photo via AP, File
FILE - EPA Administrator Lee Zeldin speaks at the East Palestine Fire Department in East Palestine, Ohio, Feb. 3,
2025.
Author: MATTHEW DALY (Associated Press)
Published: 12:44 PM PDT March 12, 2025
Updated: 1:05 PM PDT March 12, 2025
WASHINGTON, D.C., USA — In what he called the “most consequential day of deregulation in
American history,” the head of the Environmental Protection Agency announced a series of
actions Wednesday to roll back landmark environmental regulations, including rules on
pollution from coal-fired power plants, climate change and electric vehicles.
“We are driving a dagger through the heart of climate-change religion and ushering in
America’s Golden Age,'' EPA Administrator Lee Zeldin said in an essay in The Wall Street
Journal.
If approved after a lengthy process that includes public comment, the Trump administration's
actions will eliminate trillions of dollars in regulatory costs and “hidden taxes,” Zeldin said,
lowering the cost of living for American families and reducing prices for such essentials such as
buying a car, heating your home and operating a business.
“Our actions will also reignite American manufacturing, spreading economic benefits to
communities," he wrote. “Energy dominance stands at the center of America's resurgence.”
Despite not yet being approved, the EPA has instructed Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund
disbursements to be suspended "until further notice," according to a lawsuit by the Climate
United Fund against Citibank.
In all, Zeldin said he is rolling back 31 environmental rules, including a scientific finding that has
long been the central basis for U.S. action against climate change.
Zeldin said he and President Donald Trump support rewriting the agency’s 2009 finding that
planet-warming greenhouse gases endanger public health and welfare. The Obama-era
determination under the Clean Air Act is the legal underpinning of a host of climate regulations
for motor vehicles, power plants and other pollution sources.
Environmentalists and climate scientists call the endangerment finding a bedrock of U.S. law
and say any attempt to undo it will have little chance of success.
“In the face of overwhelming science, it’s impossible to think that the EPA could develop a
contradictory finding that would stand up in court," said David Doniger, a climate expert at the
Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group.
In a related action, Zeldin said EPA will rewrite a rule restricting air pollution from fossil-fuel fired
power plants and a separate measure restricting emissions from cars and trucks. Zeldin and the
Republican president incorrectly label the car rule as an electric vehicle "mandate.''
President Joe Biden's Democratic administration had said the power plant rules would reduce
pollution and improve public health while supporting the reliable, long-term supply of electricity
that America needs.
Biden, who made fighting climate change a hallmark of his presidency, cited the car rule as a
key factor in what he called “historic progress” on his pledge that half of all new cars and trucks
sold in the U.S. will be zero-emission by 2030.
The EPA also will take aim at rules restricting industrial pollution of mercury and other air toxins,
soot pollution and a “good neighbor” rule intended to restrict smokestack emissions that
burden downwind areas with smog. The EPA also targeted a clean water law that
provides federal protections for rivers, streams and wetlands.
None of the changes take effect immediately, and nearly all will require a long rulemaking
process. Environmental groups vowed to oppose the actions, which one said would result in
"the greatest increase in pollution in decades'' in the U.S.
Amanda Leland, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, made the claim as she
denounced Zeldin's "unlawful attack on the public health of the American people.''
The EPA has also terminated its diversity, equity and inclusion programs and will shutter parts
of the agency focused on environmental justice, Zeldin said. The effort strived to improve
conditions in areas heavily burdened by industrial pollution, mostly in low-income and majority-
Black or Hispanic communities.
“This isn’t about abandoning environmental protection — it’s about achieving it through
innovation and not strangulation,” Zeldin wrote. “By reconsidering rules that throttled oil and
gas production and unfairly targeted coal-fired power plants, we are ensuring that American
energy remains clean, affordable and reliable.”
University of Pennsylvania climate scientist Michael Mann called the EPA’s action “just the latest
form of Republican climate denial. They can no longer deny climate change is happening, so
instead they’re pretending it’s not a threat, despite the overwhelming scientific evidence that it
is, perhaps, the greatest threat that we face today.”
The directive to reconsider the endangerment finding and other EPA rules was a
recommendation of Project 2025, a conservative blueprint for Trump’s second term. Russell
Vought, director of the White House Office of Management and Budget and co-author of
Project 2025, called the actions long overdue.
“EPA’s regulation of the climate affects the entire national economy — jobs, wages and family
budgets,″ Vought said Wednesday.
“The Trump administration’s ignorance is trumped only by its malice toward the planet,”
countered Jason Rylander, legal director at the Center for Biological Diversity’s Climate Law
Institute. “Come hell and high water, raging fires and deadly heatwaves, Trump and his cronies
are bent on putting polluter profits ahead of people’s lives."
Reconsidering the endangerment finding and other actions “won’t stand up in court,'' Rylander
said. ”We’re going to fight it every step of the way.”
The United States is the second largest carbon polluter in the world, after China, and the
largest historical emitter of greenhouse gases.
The moves to terminate environmental justice staff follows an action last week to drop a case
against a Louisiana petrochemical plant accused of increasing cancer risk in a majority-Black
community. Zeldin called environmental justice a term that “has been used primarily as an
excuse to fund left-wing activists instead of actually spending those dollars to directly
remediate environmental issues for those communities.”
Matthew Tejada, who once led EPA’s environmental justice office, said Trump and Zeldin were
"taking us back to a time of unfettered pollution across the nation, leaving every American
exposed to toxic chemicals, dirty air and contaminated water.” Tejada now works at the NRDC.
Anne Bradbury, CEO of the American Exploration & Production Council, an oil industry group,
hailed Zeldin's actions and said the U.S. is “stronger and more secure when we are energy
dominant."
Her group has long called for changes to EPA rules so they are “workable, effective and build
on the significant emissions reductions" made by oil and gas producers, Bradbury said. “We
support updating these rules so the American people can continue to benefit from affordable,
reliable and clean American energy.”
New Jersey Rep. Frank Pallone, the top Democrat on the House Energy and Commerce
Committee, called Zeldin's actions “a despicable betrayal of the American people.”
Every day, more Americans lose their jobs, homes and even their lives to worsening climate
disasters, Pallone said. Trump and Zeldin “are making a mockery of those people’s pain,”
Pallone said, adding that "will have swift and catastrophic ramifications for the environment and
health of all Americans.''
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report.
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
Two mothers connect over a song, one son's heart and another's life saved
KGW
Legacy providers vote to ratify first contract, capping nearly month-long strike
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...