NATION WORLD
Hakeem Jeffries’ record-setting 8-
Slots, Jackpots & Tablegame, over
100 to choose from
hour speech delays vote on GOP
Chumba Casinio Learn Mo
tax, spending cut bill
The speech pushed a final vote on Republican President Donald
Trump's tax bill, initially expected in the early morning, into the daylight
hours.
AAdd 11 ooff 11
IN OTHER NEWS
Man accused of Safeway
stabbing linked to 2017 MA
train platform attack
Credit: AP
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries and the Democratic Caucus, assemble on the steps of the Capitol.
Author: MARY CLARE JALONICK (Associated Press)
Published: 10:56 AM PDT July 3, 2025
Updated: 10:56 AM PDT July 3, 2025
WASHINGTON — There’s no filibuster in the House, but Democratic leader Hakeem Jeffries
essentially conducted one anyway.
Jeffries held the House floor for more than eight hours Thursday, taking his “sweet time” with a
marathon floor speech that delayed passage of Republicans’ massive tax and spending cuts
legislation and gave his minority party a lengthy spotlight to excoriate what he called an
“immoral” bill.
As Democratic leader, Jeffries can speak for as long as he wants during debate on legislation
— hence its nickname on Capitol Hill, the “magic minute," that lasts as long as leaders are
speaking.
He began the speech at 4:53 a.m. EDT, and was on pace to break the record set by then-House
Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., in 2021, when he was the GOP leader. McCarthy spoke for 8
hours, 32 minutes when he angrily criticized Democrats’ “Build Back Better” legislation,
breaking a record set by Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., when she spoke about immigration for 8
hours, 7 minutes in 2018.
“I feel an obligation, Mr. Speaker, to stand on this House floor and take my sweet time,” Jeffries
said as he opened.
The speech pushed a final vote on Republican President Donald Trump's tax bill, initially
expected in the early morning, into the daylight hours. The New York Democrat used the time
to criticize the bill’s health care and food aid cuts, tax breaks for the wealthy and rollbacks to
renewable energy programs, among other parts of the bill that Democrats decry.
He also killed time by riffing on hip-hop, King George III and his own life story, among other
diversions. He called out Republicans who have voiced concerns about the bill, read stories
from people concerned about their health care from those GOP lawmakers’ districts and
praised his own members, some of whom sat behind him and cheered, clapped, laughed and
joined hands.
“This reckless Republican budget is an immoral document, and that is why I stand here on the
floor of the House of Representatives with my colleagues in the House Democratic caucus to
stand up and push back against it with everything we have,” Jeffries said.
Jeffries sneaked small bites of food and drank liquids to boost his energy, but did not leave the
chamber or his podium. The speech would be over if he did.
Democrats were powerless to stop the huge bill, which Republicans are passing by using an
obscure budget procedure that bypasses the Senate filibuster. So they were using the powers
they do have, mostly to delay. In the Senate, Democratic leader Chuck Schumer of New York
forced Senate clerks to read the bill for almost 16 hours over the weekend.
Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., similarly gained attention in April when he spoke for more than 25
hours on the Senate floor and broke the record for the longest continuous Senate floor speech
in the chamber’s history. Booker was assisted by fellow Democrats who gave him a break from
speaking by asking him questions on the Senate floor, but Jeffries’ “magic minute” did not allow
for any interaction with other members.
Republicans who were sitting on the floor when Jeffries started trickled out, leaving half the
chamber empty. And as they anxiously awaited their vote, some mocked him on social media.
“Anything that drives House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries this crazy must be good,” posted
South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham. “Pass the One Big Beautiful Bill now.”
___
Associated Press writers Lisa Mascaro and Leah Askrinam contributed to this report.
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
AllModern Is Making Modern Furniture Shopping Simple
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.* *Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
AllModern Curates Every Style of Modern Furniture
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.* *Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
No Download Required
Over 100 new games introduced. Come join the fun.
Chumba Casino|Sponsored Play for free
Legacy providers vote to ratify first contract, capping nearly month-long strike
KGW
BREAKING: Is Illinois in an SEC Battle for THIS Quarterback? | Penn St Preview | Illini
Podcast
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...