Try 1-on-1 Language Learning
Starting from $3/hr. No commitments or expensive
packages required
AmazingTalker Visit Site
LOCAL NEWS
Portland State University report:
Nearly half of all federal funding for
tribes at risk under Trump's 'big
beautiful' bill
Officials say there are serious concerns among tribes in the Northwest
about further cuts, including air quality funding.
AAdd 11 ooff 11

 00:00/00:00 x 
IN OTHER NEWS
Credit: AP Photo/Lindsey Wasson, File
Man accused of Safeway
Serina Fast Horse talks with Jacy Bowles as they walk to the former Elwha Dam site during the 2023 Tribal Climate
Camp on the Olympic Peninsula. stabbing linked to 2017 MA
train platform attack
Author: Associated Press
Published: 2:07 PM PDT September 25, 2025
Updated: 2:09 PM PDT September 25, 2025
PORTLAND, Ore. — A new report from Portland State University found that budget cuts under
President Donald Trump’s new spending bill threaten nearly half of federal funding allocated to
federally recognized Native American and Alaska Native nations last year.
Roughly $530 million of the $1.19 billion allocated to Northwest tribal nations in fiscal year 2024
— used to fulfill the federal government’s trust and treaty obligations to Native American and
Alaska Native tribes — is at risk of being cut. The congressionally allocated funds serve myriad
functions for tribes in the Northwest, including providing clean drinking water, affordable
housing, schools, transit and land management. Funding is decided by Congress on a yearly
basis and can be disbursed over a period of time that exceeds the calendar year it is allocated.
Sponsored Links
AllModern Is Making Modern Furniture Shopping
Simple
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.*
*Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM Shop Now
“All across the board tribes are worried about the funding cuts that are happening right now,”
said Serina Fast Horse, who is Lakota and Blackfeet and serves as the co-director of the
Northwest Environmental Justice Center, which provides grant application assistance and
advising to Indigenous communities in the Northwest.
Fast Horse says there are serious concerns among Northwest tribes about further cuts to vital
programs ranging from health and wellness to early childhood education. The report warns of
vulnerabilities to programs and grants that tribes rely on for resilience in the face of climate
change, like improving home weatherization, managing forestland and renovating aging
homes. Federal dollars to help Northwest tribes bolster their infrastructure against the
increasing threats from wildfire, drought and sea-level rise could also be slashed.
___
The Portland State report found millions in Clean Air Act funding could also go away — the
Environmental Protection Agency earmarked nearly $2 million in 2024 for Northwest tribes in a
series of grants for monitoring air quality and pollution. Much of the congressionally allocated
funding has yet to be distributed to tribes and is now at risk of being cut altogether.
RELATED: Oregon renews legal battle against Trump administration after it pulled out of
Columbia River salmon restoration agreement
The report demonstrates how proposed major reductions across the federal government,
including at the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of the Interior and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, could reverberate across Indian Country.
Tribal officials shared concerns that drastic cuts could cause the federal government to fall
short of trust and treaty obligations that mandate the federal government support tribal
services, uphold tribal sovereignty and protect tribal treaty resources — responsibilities that
courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, have repeatedly upheld.
Tirzepatide Wins For
Weight Loss - Only
$119/Month
Ships to your door. No
insurance required. 3 simple
steps.
FuturHealth
Learn More
“All the funding reductions addressing clean water, air and dealing with climate change have
impacts on the Tribes’ culture and treaty protected resources,” said William E. Ray Jr., chair of
the Klamath Tribes.
Researchers declined to disclose specific projects at risk of elimination for fear of retaliation,
and a number of tribes and tribal organizations declined to comment to InvestigateWest, citing
similar concerns.
“Trump and Congressional Republicans are wreaking havoc on Tribal communities with their
‘Big, Ugly BETRAYAL’ of a law that arbitrarily cuts many programs supporting folks in Indian
Country, where chronic underfunding is already impacting services and exacerbating
disparities,” said Oregon Senator Jeff Merkley, a Democrat.
Find Support and Community
Justify Learn more
He added that the federal government plays an outsized role in funding essential services to
tribal communities, including health care, education and public safety, and that the Inflation
Reduction Act took important steps in advancing funding for water infrastructure and
environmental programs for tribes.
In 2024, Clean Air Act related funds were used to fund 15 projects for 12 Northwest tribes. The
Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation, the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla
Indian Reservation, and the Tulalip Tribes are some of the Native American nations set to
receive research grants for improving air quality and pollution monitoring. Among 12 tribes
selected for funding, several of them focus on minimizing exposure to poor air quality and
harmful pollutants to their elderly and medically vulnerable residents. Other tribes intend to
study impacts of pollutants on important first foods — culturally significant staple foods
consumed before colonization — that officials say are critical to improving health outcomes for
their citizens.
-30% -25%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
-40% -60%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
Researchers at PSU examined 469 programs impacted by President Trump’s reversal of former
President Joe Biden’s Executive Order 14008, which sought to address climate change and
created a number of environmental justice initiatives. Sixty of the programs identified by
researchers were specifically named in the Republican-led spending bill for cuts, and 17 of
those provided funding directly to tribes. The programs accounted for roughly 35% of all
federal investments in tribes in 2024. The report says not all of the funding will be cut, but a
significant portion of it could be.
The cuts come at a time when Native Americans and Alaska Natives already have limited
access to federal services and funds, according to a December 2024 report from the U.S.
Government Accountability Office, a nonpartisan congressional watchdog. It found when tribes
had to compete with other entities for federal funding, they may receive a small portion of the
total amount, and that limited access to federal services and funds contributes to known
disparities for Native Americans and Alaska Natives compared to other Americans.
Of the $20.15 billion in federal funding that went to tribes between 2010 and 2024, tribes within
the boundaries of Idaho received a total of $304.56 million, Washington tribes $1.81 billion,
Oregon tribes $690.76 million, and Alaska Native tribes received $2.35 billion.
Other programs at risk of being cut include the EPA’s embattled Environmental Justice
Government-to-Government Program, which funded initiatives by states, tribes and local
governments to support activities that lead to measurable environmental or public health
impacts.
Under that program, in 2023, the EPA awarded the Tulalip Tribes $977,000 to work in
conjunction with the Confederated Tribes and Bands of Yakama Nation to create a tool to
detect which homes are at greatest risk from wildfire smoke infiltration and dangerously hot
weather, which are growing issues affecting both communities.
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
-25%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
While the federal government has repeatedly affirmed its obligations to tribes, actual
allocations remain disproportionately small compared to population figures. In 2024, Native
American tribes received just 1.7% of federal energy and environment spending, despite Native
people making up 2.9% of the U.S. population.
Between 2010 and 2024, tribes within the bounds of Idaho, Washington and Oregon received
roughly $2.81 billion in federal investments in energy and environmental infrastructure, which
represents roughly 14% of the $20 billion in allocations made to tribes nationwide.
The researchers determined that programs funded under the Inflation Reduction Act, Biden’s
2022 climate, health and tax law, are at particular risk of being eliminated. The funding
allocated to tribes under the IRA represented a historic investment in infrastructure in Indian
Country, more than doubling energy and infrastructure investment from $1.51 billion nationwide
to $3.94 billion in 2024, around .04% of total federal grant spending obligations for 2024.
“When you put them in the context of how much money the federal government actually
spends on certain things, it’s pennies on the dollar,” said Sophie Lalande, a co-author of the
PSU report.
Soon after taking office and without consulting Congress, the Trump administration suspended
some grants that tribal communities used heavily, such as community change grants,
distributed by the EPA’s Offices of Environmental Justice and of External Civil Rights
Compliance during the Biden administration, to support climate resilience and clean energy.
Distributed as a part of the Inflation Reduction Act, the grants were suspended as part of the
Trump administration’s anti-diversity, equity and inclusion efforts.
The grants helped tribal communities in the Northwest tremendously, according to Fast Horse.
“They were providing hundreds of thousands of dollars to communities for infrastructure
improvements, like access to clean drinking water and climate resilience hubs, just really
essential pieces of community development for health and safety of communities,” she said.
The report stresses a multiplier effect from investments made in tribal communities.
Infrastructure dollars invested on tribal lands often serve as anchors for broader local
development, since tribal lands often share regional infrastructure like power grids, roads or
water systems with non-Native communities, with the power of dollars rippling outward into
surrounding rural towns and cities.
Bobby Cochran, a researcher with Portland State University and senior project manager at the
National Policy Consensus Center, co-authored the report.
“We just haven’t made a major investment in infrastructure since the ’60s or ’70s, so this wasn’t
fluffy,” he said. “It’s really important stuff that was just trying to play catch-up.”
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
AllModern Curates Every Style of Modern Furniture
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.* *Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
AllModern Is Making Modern Furniture Shopping Simple
Premium-quality modern furniture + decor – delivered fast + free.* *Some exclusions apply.
ALLMODERN.COM|Sponsored Shop Now
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Missing 4-year-old Alabama boy found dead; father arrested on explosives, chemical
endangerment charges
KGW
Portland police investigate homicide after man's body found in Johnson Creek
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...