Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
GOOD MORNING, NEWS!
Dec 8, 2025 at 8:50 am
Good Morning, News: PCEF Pays Out $64 Million,
National Parks Are Now Free on Trump's
Birthday Instead of Juneteenth, and At Last, the
Return of Krampus!
COURTNEY VAUGHN
Krampus knows where your wicked children are hiding. GETTY IMAGES/GUZEL KOLOBOVA/STOCK IMAGE
The Mercury provides news and fun every single day—but your help is
essential. If you believe Portland benefits from smart, local journalism and
arts coverage, please consider making a small monthly contribution,
because without you, there is no us. Thanks for your support!
Good morning, Portland! We’re just under two weeks away from winter’s
official onset. Need gift ideas, or tips on beating Seasonal Affective
Disorder? How 'bout a bingo card to guide you through Portland’s
best/diverse soup offerings? Now might be a good time to revisit our
Winter Guide, which is exactly what it sounds like.
Expect rain showers today, with a high of 55 degrees and a low of 49.
IN LOCAL NEWS:
Seven years ago, Portlanders approved a bold new tax mechanism for
funding climate-oriented, clean energy projects. Since its inception, the
Portland Clean Energy Fund (PCEF) has doled out $1.71 billion in funds
to local nonprofits for various energy efficiency upgrades. This year, the
fund is set to award about $64 million in grants. Taylor Griggs checks in
on the program, its progress, and what projects or organizations we can
expect to see funded.
It’s been a tough year for climate work around the country, with the
Trump administration slashing funding for programs intended to
reduce carbon emissions and mitigate the threats of the climate crisis.
But Portland's clean energy fund just allocated $64 million to nonprofits
for climate projects.
Portland Mercury
@portlandmercury.com
Itʼs been a tough year for climate work around the country, with the
Trump administration slashing funding for programs intended to
reduce carbon emissions and mitigate the threats of the climate crisis.
ButPortland'scleanenergyfundjustallocated$64millionto
A father of three in Vancouver, Washington was mauled by an ICE
canine after the man was tricked into leaving his house, where ICE
agents were waiting. The Oregonian reports Wilmer Toledo-Martinez
was attacked by a dog despite not resisting arrest or trying to flee from
immigration agents. He was hauled off to the Northwest ICE Processing
Center in Tacoma after sustaining serious injuries from the dog bites.
Toledo-Martinez’s attorney says he was brought to the United States as
a teen by his parents, and is undocumented. He married an American
woman and now has three children. His lawyer says he has no criminal
convictions.
Ever wondered what happens to drivers who hit bicyclists and cause
serious injuries? Turns out, not much. Bike Portland reports that a 21-
year-old driver ran a red light and hit a woman riding her bike in
Southeast Portland last year, leaving the woman with several broken
ribs and an ankle fracture. Despite the cyclist’s injuries, and video
evidence showing the driver running the light, a Portland Police officer
never cited the driver. Instead, he decided the driver “was remorseful
and apologetic for hitting the cyclist” and that was good enough. What
makes this story even harder to digest is the fact that last month, a
motorist was ticketed for careless driving after a fender-bender
involving two cars in Northeast Portland. The victim wasn’t seriously
injured, and the other driver reportedly wasn’t speeding or impaired, but
the victim was a local police officer.
Last Friday marked the annual Krampuslauf—-a devilish, playful ode to
the lore of Krampus that sees several costumed Portlanders stroll
Hawthorne Boulevard warning wicked children and naughty adults. The
Mercury’s Andrew Harlan caught the scene on video. If you missed the
bevy of Krampus-themed events over the weekend, you can still catch a
Krampus-themed haunted house this weekend, if you're so inclined.
portlandmercury
View profile
Savatage · Christmas Eve (Sarajevo 12/24)
WWaattcchh oonn IInnssttaaggrraamm
IN NATIONAL/WORLD NEWS:
Frank Gehry, an internationally renowned architect, died last Friday at
the age of 96. Gehry was the mastermind behind the Guggenheim
Museum Bilbao in Spain–a hulking collection of reflective cubic figures
arranged in a way that’s as much an art piece as it is a building. He also
designed the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles and the
Fondation Louis Vuitton museum in Paris, among others.
After a judge dismissed the case against former FBI Director James
Comey over a procedural problem with Lindsey Halligan (the
unqualified lawyer Trump illegally appointed to be the US attorney
without Congressional approval), the US DOJ has another hurdle if it
wants to try again to indict Comey. Refresher: Trump wants Comey
behind bars because he's a political adversary, even though the DOJ
previously declined to prosecute him for allegedly leaking FBI info to the
press during Trump's first term. The Associated Press reports a judge is
temporarily prohibiting prosecutors from using evidence they relied on
to indict Comey back in September. The evidence was extracted from
personal computer files of a Columbia University law professor Comey
corresponded with, but the professor's lawyer argues the DOJ went
beyond the scope of the warrant and held on to data and files it
shouldn't have.
▶
National parks admission will no longer be free on Martin Luther King,
Jr. Day or Juneteenth, but will instead be free on Donald Trump's
birthday.
Phil Lewis
@phillewis.bsky.social
The Trump administration has removed MLK Day and Juneteenth as
holidays that include free entrance to national parks, adding the
presidentʼs birthday instead
Democrats in Congress are pushing for the release of classified video
footage showing the moments a boat off the Caribbean was struck by
US military fire back in September. The video has led to increased
scrutiny of Pete my kink is war Hegseth, who's insisted the boats he's
been targeting are carrying drug smugglers, despite reports indicating
they were likely fishermen. After the strike, survivors clung to the boat,
trying to stay alive before a second strike followed, killing them.
We can't get enough of the turnt-up inflatable holiday decorations. Do your
thang.
935.6
K
9920
671.5K
Watch more exciting vid Watch now
@aiflowa1
You a lil’ boo thang #christmas
#decoration #grinch #fyp #sora
Lil Boo Thang - Paul Russell
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: GOOD MORNING, NEWS!
Courtney Vaughn
Courtney Vaughn is the news editor at the Portland Mercury. She appreciates your news tips
and musings. Reach out at cvaughn@portlandmercury.com or on Bluesky.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In Good Morning, News!
Good Morning, News: Portland's WNBA Team Hires a General Manager, Intel Now Partly
Owned By US Government, and Israeli Strike Kills 20, Including Journalists
Good Morning, News: Radioactive Shrimp, DC Under Siege, and It’s Safe To Swim in the
Willamette Again
Good Morning, News: Pentagon Spokesperson Hates Netflix, John Bolton Under
Investigation Since Biden, and Are There Plainclothes Police at Portland's ICE Protests?
Good Morning, News: A (Small and Necessary) Fee Increase at Oregon State Parks,
Transportation Package on Hold, and Donald Trump is Still Alive
Good Morning, News: Dick Cheney Dead at 84, Multnomah County Pauses its Rapid
Rehousing Program, and Dan Ryan's Hypocritical Crusade Against the Parks Levy
Good Morning, News: Republicans Vote to Kill Local Radio, Trump's Really Creepy Epstein
Letter, and Damian Lillard's Coming Home!
Editors' Picks
Updated (Again): Rene's Receipts
The Biggest Portland Transportation News of 2023
POP QUIZ PDX: Get In, Losers... We're Going Shopping!
Your Mercury 2024 Election Cheat Sheet
THE TRASH REPORT: In Honor of Short Kings. Plus: Ingenius Legal Defense Strategies,
Bears in Portland, and Portland in Song
POP QUIZ PDX: It's the Very Best of Our "KNOW THAT PORTLAND" Trivia Questions!
Popular Articles
Good Morning, News: Portland Can't Regulate on Zenith, Portlanders Can't Get Vaccines,
and Jackie and Shadow Face an Old Foe—Developers
Good Morning, News: Light Punishment for Super Reckless Local Driver, Thousands of
Hollywood Celebs Pledge Support for Gaza, and Portland Wants To Weed Out “Unserious”
Political Candidates
Good Morning, News: More Bonkers Signal Chat Stuff, a Rare Oregon Orca Sighting, and
Why Aren't Portland Elementary Schools Retrofitted for Earthquakes?
Good Morning, News: Oregon Takes on Greenwashing, Palestinian College Activist
Arrested by ICE, and Canada Vows to "Drop Gloves" with Trump
Good Morning, News: State Transpo Referendum, PSU Union Busting, Epstein Associate's
Prison Toilet Paper
Good Morning, News: "Fake" Oregon Firefighters Arrested in LA, Fake TikTok Shutdown,
and Fake Patriot Moves Back to the White House
Good Morning, News: Heat Warnings Continue, Street Racers Outrun Portland Cops, and
Trump Threatens Military Occupation of Cities He Hates (👋)
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286