Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jul 30, 2023 at 7:03 pm
With Revenue Windfall, Portland Clean Energy
Fund Committee Approves Climate Investment
Plan
Despite past hiccups, PCEF is now on track to dole out $750 million on carbon cutting projects through
2028.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
Downtown Portland on a smoky day. SUZETTE SMITH
Portland needs to act fast if it wants to achieve its goal of reaching net-zero
carbon emissions by 2050. Though the city has several plans on the books to
slash citywide greenhouse gas emissions, the Portland Clean Energy
Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) is among the most promising—and well-
funded—avenues for local climate action. And after a somewhat rocky
start, PCEF now appears to be finding its footing—almost five years after
65% of Portland voters approved the fund as a ballot measure in 2018.
Last fall, led by Portland Commissioner Carmen Rubio—who heads the
Bureau of Planning and Sustainability (BPS), which houses PCEF—Portland
City Council adopted legislative amendments to the fund. The amendments
were intended to strengthen PCEF's accountability and refine its purpose,
prompted by a blemishing 2022 audit of the program that revealed it wasn't
on track to meet its goals.
PCEF collects a 1% surcharge on local sales at large retailers to fund local
energy decarbonization projects, specifically targeted to help residents
most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Much of its funding is
dedicated for doling out grants to local climate justice nonprofit
organizations who will carry out PCEF's mission through community
projects.
Portland Clean Energy Fund
But dealing with so many nonprofits can get tricky, especially given the
unexpected surplus money PCEF ended up with. The fund initially had a
difficult time managing all its grant contracts.
One nonprofit PCEF awarded $12 million to in 2022 was later revealed to
have a history of financial impropriety, raising concerns about the
program's grant review process. The fund ended up rescinding that grant,
but the incident served as a wakeup call for how PCEF should move
forward.
Over the next five years, PCEF has $750 million to invest in decarbonization
projects, and project leaders want to make sure they do it right.
One of the key elements of the new—and hopefully improved—PCEF
program is its Climate Investment Plan (CIP), which will guide PCEF's
investments through the next five years in order to “achieve major carbon
reductions in ways that benefit those most impacted by the climate crisis.”
After nearly a year of community engagement to formulate the plan, PCEF
committee members approved the first CIP on July 20, and plan to present
it to City Council in September.
In a time when rising global temperatures cause increasing devastation,
both close to home and around the world, climate activists say PCEF's work
is both vital and only a drop in the bucket of what needs to be done to
combat the climate crisis. However, despite outstanding concerns that City
Council will interfere in CIP implementation, PCEF leaders are optimistic
about their ability to make a meaningful dent in making Portland a greener
and more equitable city—and they acknowledge there is much more to be
done.
Working through growing pains
While many city programs are dealing with budget deficits and shortfalls,
PCEF has had the opposite problem: the fund generated unexpectedly high
revenues. Initial estimates expected PCEF to generate $44 to $61 million
annually, but actual revenues were much higher—in 2020-21, the fund
pulled in $116 million. The surprising windfall made budget management at
PCEF more difficult, and also put increased scrutiny on the program to
spend its money wisely.
Concerns about operations at PCEF reached a tipping point in March 2022,
when a city audit found the fund was falling behind in its goals, flagging the
program's oversight of nonprofit partner agencies and loosely-defined
performance metrics. The audit recommended PCEF leaders "set
timeframes to complete all elements of the legislation and make plans
transparent."
The audit said PCEF's focus on "capacity building" for grant recipients—
allowing organizations to use fund money to increase staffing, training, and
more—may divert money from carbon reduction projects. PCEF leaders
defended the investment in capacity building, noting many of the
nonprofits it worked with are new and small, and organizational funding
may be necessary for them to implement projects down the line.
The audit also pointed to problems with PCEF's administration funding
cap, which had been set at 5 percent, limiting how much money PCEF
could spend on staff to review grant and contract proposals. It also
recommended the fund align itself more closely with the city's climate plans
and better define its emissions reductions goals, necessitating stricter
oversight of the nonprofits it partnered with.
The legislative amendments City Council approved last fall addressed the
audit's concerns, and a recent audit update says the program is now on the
right track. Per the amendments, PCEF can now use 12 percent of tax
revenues for administrative costs, allowing for adequate staffing.
The audit update states PCEF is now on track to "further define capacity
building," separating organizational capacity building into a distinct
funding category in the CIP. And the CIP itself, which lays out how PCEF
can align with city climate goals, will make it clear how proposed
investments are "directly or indirectly supporting actions in the City’s
Climate Emergency Workplan."
Despite the problems, PCEF has seen success in its past grant cycles. Last
summer, the fund doled out $107 million for 65 community-oriented clean
energy projects — Portland’s largest-ever single climate justice investment.
Grant recipients included Bikes for Humanity PDX, which received $20,000
to give 100 free bikes to Portlanders in need; Albina Vision Trust, which
used a $1,700,000 grant to help break ground on the Albina One Affordable
Housing development; and the Community Energy Project, which was
given $10 million for “deep energy and electrification retrofits for frontline
communities.”
PCEF leaders hope the CIP will help the fund oversee further achievements
in the next five years.
The Climate Investment Plan
PCEF committee members and leaders celebrated last week's approval of
the inaugural CIP. They especially commended the fund for its community
engagement work to inform development of the plan. Throughout the
development of the CIP, PCEF hosted in-person and virtual workshops and
listening sessions, receiving well over 500 public comments in the process.
"There's been a deep and thoughtful public engagement process...this is not
a plan that's come out of nowhere," said PCEF committee member Megan
Horst at last week's meeting. "The public should know that [the CIP] hasn't
come out of some backroom dealing."
The plan details how PCEF will allocate three-quarters of a billion dollars
between 2023 and 2028. The bulk of the money—$473 million—will be
dedicated for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. Another
$129 million will be directed to transportation decarbonization, $71 million
for green infrastructure like street tree planting, $42 million will go to
climate jobs, workforce, and contractor development, and $20 million will
go to regenerative agriculture projects. The fund earmarked $13 million for
helping contracted nonprofits bolster staff and resources, and another $2
million for "other projects that reduce or sequester greenhouse gases."
CIP investments. (Portland Clean Energy Fund)
These goals will be funded through "community responsive" grants,
strategic programs, and the tree canopy maintenance reserve, which funds
targeted long-term maintenance of the city's tree canopy to "ensure the
sequestration of carbon emissions in a manner that aligns with PCEF’s
purpose."
While specifics on outcomes of the grant funding have yet to be
determined, the strategic programs funding pathway illustrates tangible
programs that the CIP plans to implement over the next five years. Two
such strategic programs were deemed especially important by City Council
and have been fast-tracked: a $40 million investment in equitable tree
canopy coverage and $60 million for renewable energy upgrades in
affordable multifamily housing. Portland's Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability is currently in the process of installing thousands of energy-
efficient heat pumps and cooling units in multiunit dwellings with their
PCEF-funded "Cooling Portland" program.
Other programs in the final CIP include more than $200 million for clean
energy improvements in single-family homes and small commercial
buildings, helping individuals and businesses transition to sustainable
energy to power their homes and workplaces. The CIP states that
residential and commercial buildings account for more than 40 percent of
Multnomah County's carbon emissions.
Another big chunk of the county's greenhouse gas emissions come from
transportation. While PCEF's programming has overlooked the climate
impact of transportation in the past, the new CIP does not. The plan
dedicates $20 million for a "comprehensive e-bike access and support"
program, which will offer rebates to income-qualified households for new e-
bike and cargo e-bikes from local bike retailers. The e-bike rebate is an
exciting prospect to many Portlanders who have championed electric bike
access after seeing the success of similar programs in cities like Denver.
Another strategic plan dedicates $25 million to expanding the Portland
Bureau of Transportation's (PBOT) Transportation Wallet program,
"offering qualifying participants a package of free transportation
options...that meet their individual needs with an emphasis on low-carbon
transportation modes."
Although Portland bureaus like PBOT are currently suffering from financial
woes and could benefit from the additional financial support from PCEF,
the fund's investment in PBOT projects isn't intended to backfill the
bureau's draining budget, though that may end up being a byproduct of the
financial support.
"The current draft of the PCEF investments includes an allocation to PBOT
for the Transportation Wallet and this may be a way to help pay for the
program if we have to make our own cuts," PBOT Communications Director
Hannah Schafer told the Mercury. "Our understanding is that PCEF does
not want to be replacing programs, they want to be adding programs, but
we will have to see what happens."
What's next?
While PCEF committee members are excited about the CIP, some worry
about what will happen when the proposal goes to City Council.
At last week's meeting, PCEF committee member Robin Wang stated
concerns that City Council could make "backroom negotiations" and
significantly change the CIP.
"I'm concerned Council may [make changes] in their desire to get votes or
support...that what we present to them and what they approve could be
vastly different. I think that would be undoing the will of the people," Wang
said. "I spent a tremendous amount of time putting all this together and I'm
concerned that work will be in jeopardy."
Wang's comments come after a Willamette Week article reported
Commissioner Rene Gonzalez's interest in "tweaking" PCEF and other
voter-approved ballot measures. It's unclear what elements he'd want to
change, and why. Gonzalez's team didn't respond to the Mercury's requests
for comment. Given the public reaction to the commissioner's recent
attempts to overhaul major aspects of the charter reform measure, it seems
likely any City Council plan to disrupt PCEF would also be met with
significant backlash.
PCEF leaders also acknowledge that, while a $750 million investment is a
good start, Portland's clean energy transformation will require a lot more.
"It's still a drop in the bucket in the grand scheme of the climate
investments we need to make," PCEF Program Manager Sam Baraso told
the Mercury in an interview.
But Baraso said the plan will go a long way to ferment collaboration
between the private sector, the government and nonprofits—which will
have a big impact going into the future.
"We really tried to elevate a plan that's tapping into each of these sectors to
their best use," Baraso said. "We've got PBOT running the Transportation
Wallet, let's expand on that. Let's tap into Urban Forestry. We've got the
private sector, let's lean into their administrative capacities and bring out
nonprofits to do what they do best. I think the essence of the plan is how
we bring all those sectors together."
Portland City Council will hold a PCEF work session on August 15. From
there, more details of its implementation will be revealed.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Oregon Sues Trump’s USDA Over Yanked SNAP Benefits for Refugees
Portland Budget Tweak Causes Heated Discussion on Homelessness
PSU Fired Women’s Resource Center Director With No Explanation
With a Tenuous Ceasefire in Gaza, Portland Councilors Pledge to Investigate the City's
Links to Israel
Seattle Area Trans Women Are Being Attacked by Groups of Men
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Editors' Picks
The Biggest Portland Transportation News of 2023
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About the Oregon Ducks, Classic PDX TV, and the Best
Movie of All Tiiiiiiiime!
Tom Cruise and Ed Begley Jr. Are Relatable, We Owe Bats an Apology, and I, Elinor Jones,
am now a Sports Journalist
THE TRASH REPORT: The Academy Award for Contagious Disease Goes to...
As Maxine Dexter Touts Progressive Values, Conservative Donors are Flooding Her
Campaign Coffers
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About Old-Timey Statues, Parades, and (Whoopsy...)
PORTLAND IS SINKING!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286