Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Oct 5, 2023 at 4:47 pm
Portland Set to Begin Work on First-of-Its-Kind
Climate Investment Plan Financed by Clean
Energy Fund
Portland is poised to spend $750 million over the next five years on climate projects through the city's
clean energy fund. The spending plan comes as another city bureau is in peril.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
The PCEF-funded Cooling Portland program has installed thousands of energy-efficient AC and heat pumps in low-income dwellings. PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY
COMMUNITY BENEFITS FUND
Portlanders will soon reap the benefits of a reformed Portland Clean Energy
Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) and the estimated $750 million it will
have to spend on programs like electric bike incentives and residential
clean energy upgrades from now until 2028.
Guided by the PCEF Climate Investment Plan (CIP), which received
unanimous City Council approval in September, fund leaders say the plan is
on track to reduce Portland’s carbon emissions and address climate
inequities at the same time.
PCEF was created in 2018 after voters approved a tax on large retailers to
pay for clean energy projects and initiatives. The fund raked in more money
than initially projected, and leaders were criticized for how they planned to
allocate it. Commissioner Carmen Rubio, who oversees the Portland
Bureau of Planning and Sustainability (BPS) led a PCEF code overhaul last
year, in order to get the program back on track and in better alignment with
the city’s climate goals.
The result, after a year of community engagement and fine-tuning, is the
CIP: PCEF's five-year "road map to climate action.” The plan determines
how the fund's revenue should be spent, with the goal of reducing carbon
emissions and aiding communities at the frontlines of the climate crisis.
The CIP represents a new framework for the fund’s implementation and
investments. Initially, PCEF relied on nonprofits to carry out its climate
strategy via grants, and the fund has doled out two rounds of community
grants totaling more than $100 million. The CIP still enables PCEF to grant
a portion of its revenue to community organizations looking to lead carbon
reduction projects, but most of the spending is dedicated to its new
strategic initiatives, which will be overseen by PCEF staff and may be
implemented through partnerships with nonprofits, government entities, or
businesses.
After a rocky start, program leaders hope PCEF will now be able to hone in
on the most effective and equitable ways to spend its dollars. While City
Council’s approval of the CIP makes the strategy official, some of the work
outlined in the investment plan is already underway. PCEF’s next big move
will be to open its third round of grant applications to nonprofits and
government organizations later this year. But conversations about the fund
at City Council over the past few weeks illustrated how fund staff and
stakeholders may have to deal with skepticism from some City Council
members and navigate tense budget talks citywide.
The Climate Investment Plan Is a Go
Nearly $564 million of the $750 million PCEF expects to collect over the
next five years will be allocated to strategic programs like planting more
trees, reducing carbon emissions from transportation with electric bike
incentives, spurring energy efficiency upgrades in homes and buildings
across the city, and creating resilient community centers.
The second-largest chunk of the anticipated funds, $181.2 million, will be
dedicated to grants for nonprofits who may want to carry out projects
outside the scope of the strategic programs. In PCEF's early years, questions
swirled about how the program would hold nonprofit grantees accountable.
With an increased allowance for PCEF staffing to oversee the contracts,
leaders feel confident they'll be able to manage nonprofit grants
responsibly.
"We do quarterly reporting on all of our grants and contracts, particularly
our nonprofit grant agreements," PCEF Program Manager Sam Baraso told
the Mercury in a July interview. "Along with our quarterly reporting, we get
their invoices. So [the nonprofits] submit their documentation, which
includes their payroll reports, receipts, agendas, invoices, things we need in
order to validate what they purchased lines up with the original grant
agreement we developed with them and the project management plan that
we have."
The remaining $5 million is for a tree canopy maintenance reserve,
intended to keep Portland’s tree canopy healthy and allow more people to
plant trees on their property without having to worry about expensive
upkeep.
PCEF staff have already begun work on two fast-tracked programs: growing
the city’s tree canopy and making energy efficient upgrades to new and
redeveloped affordable multifamily housing. The fund is currently in the
process of hiring several new staff members.
Nonprofits and government organizations will soon be able to submit bids
with PCEF to take on carbon-reduction projects. Organizations that focus
on historically underserved communities will be prioritized for grant
funding.
During a September 20 City Council meeting, community stakeholders
testified in support of investment plan.
"The CIP's transportation programs will put hundreds [or] thousands of
dollars directly back in the pockets of low-income people and people of
color in our city every year, and that money can be life-changing," Indi
Namkoong, transportation justice coordinator at Verde, said. "When
everybody who wants those options has them, we all win on climate, air
quality, safety, and quality of life. This plan will build more of those clean,
affordable, and abundant choices for communities who have been harmed
more often than they've been helped by the transportation investments of
the past."
The CIP’s funding allocation table can be found here.
Spending priorities
As PCEF is flush with funds, the city’s transportation department is staring
down a $32.6 million budget shortfall. The day before City Council voted to
adopt the CIP, Portland Bureau of Transportation (PBOT) staff and
transportation commissioner Mingus Mapps met with the council to
discuss the breadth of PBOT’s funding woes. Many of PBOT’s active
transportation programs are at risk. If Portland slashes investments in
biking, walking, and transit use, it will hinder the city’s climate goals.
The stark juxtaposition between PBOT’s budget deficit and PCEF’s
comparative bounty raised some questions about how the clean energy
fund is allocating its dollars.
“We have an impending funding crisis for PBOT,” Commissioner Rene
Gonzalez said at a September 20 City Council meeting. “I would certainly
be open to exploring with colleagues whether we have put sufficient
resources towards transportation decarbonization here.”
Donnie Oliveira is the director of Portland’s Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability, which oversees PCEF. Oliveira said although transportation
is a substantial contributor to Portland’s carbon emissions, there’s a lot of
demand, and $750 million isn’t enough to fund everything.
“We picked $750 million worth of projects that are fabulous and fantastic.
We probably could have picked $750 million worth of other projects,”
Oliveira said. “That's just to say the demand is very real.”
Within the CIP’s transportation decarbonization budget, $35 million will be
available for community grants over the next five years. At the recent PBOT
budget session, transportation leaders implied they may be interested in
applying for some of that funding in order to continue their existing
programming.
But if PCEF begins to serve as a stopgap for struggling city programs, it
could raise concerns about the purpose of the fund. Already, the fund has
committed $25 million toward PBOT’s Transportation Wallet program, and
that money may be what keeps the initiative alive for another five years.
Baraso told the Mercury the fund committee has been clear about wanting
its investments to be "additive," not "backfilling."
"We're making sure as part of these investments, we're able to show every
dollar we put in [is providing] additional community benefit and additional
emissions reductions," Baraso said.
The extent to which PBOT— or any other city bureau— will be able to
count on PCEF funds will be an ongoing conversation.
“PBOT is proposing to significantly curtail investments in alternative
transportation,” Mayor Ted Wheeler said at a September 27 meeting. “The
minds need to meet, rather than having one or the other, which clearly
won’t work…I'm very optimistic that we can get there.”
A Focus on Climate Justice
When members of the PCEF committee voted to approve the CIP in July,
some expressed trepidation that Portland City Council— Commissioner
Gonzalez in particular— would try to change significant components of the
plan before moving to approve it. Though some City Council members
shared concerns about the program after PCEF staff presented at City Hall
in September, none suggested major modifications.
At a September 27 City Council meeting, Gonzalez said he felt there are
“permanent racial grievances” embedded into a number of the Climate
Investment Plan’s objectives. Gonzalez said while he acknowledges
marginalized communities are more impacted by the effects of climate
change, those negative outcomes apply to lower-income people of all races.
“A strictly racial framing of that concern is problematic to me,” he said.
The CIP prioritizes “groups that have been historically under-resourced by
sustainability, climate action, and clean energy programs,” which program
developers categorized as including but not limited to people with low
incomes, people of color, and people with disabilities.
Due to Portland’s history of racist urban planning, which the city itself
categorized in a 2019 BPS report, many of the most racially diverse
neighborhoods in the city are also the most susceptible to negative
environmental impacts.
At last week’s City Council meeting, Rubio didn’t falter on the importance of
maintaining a climate justice lens within the CIP.
“Meaningful climate action can’t happen without significant investments in
communities that have been underinvested in,” Rubio said. “[Climate
justice] means we can’t make meaningful carbon emissions reductions
without investing in deferred maintenance for communities that haven’t
seen any investment in decades or ever, in some cases.”
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Fundraiser for City Councilor Displaced by Fire Creates Legal Complexity
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Strike Averted: New Seasons Grocery Workers Secure First Labor Contract
Daytime Cooling Centers Reopen In Portland Tuesday Amid Extreme Heat Wave
City of Portland Begins Enforcement of ‘Public Camping’ Rules This Weekend
Introducing the Portland Mercury’s Newest Reporter, Jeremiah Hayden!
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Pants Trivia About Naughty Cougars, Dingbat Politicians, and...
Taylor Swift! IN PORTLAND! (Squeeeeeee! 🙀 😍)
Advocates Fear Increased Pedestrian Deaths in Planned Rose Quarter Project
THE TRASH REPORT: Sexiest Man Alive vs. Sexiest Nerd on TGIF
THE TRASH REPORT: Marital Woes and Expensive Cheetos
Candidate Rene Gonzalez Faces Historic Fine for Violating Election Law
POP QUIZ PDX: Grave Robbers, Sex Scandals, and Your Mom Has Some OPINIONS About
Thanksgiving Dinner!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286