Try 1-on-1 Language Learning
Starting from $3/hr. No commitments or expensive
packages required
AmazingTalker Visit Site
HOMELESS
Portland developer hopes to break
the cycle of poverty with affordable,
transitional housing
For people battling homelessness, transitional housing can be the first
real step forward. But costs for this kind of housing have been
increasing.
Author: Blair Best, KGW Staff
Published: 5:00 PM PST March 4, 2023
Updated: 5:00 PM PST March 4, 2023

PORTLAND, Ore. — There is no denying that the housing crisis in the city of Portland and
Oregon is a never-ending issue. State officials have deemed the crisis a top priority, but there
are barriers and financial roadblocks getting in the way.
One private developer in Southeast Portland is trying to help the city’s growing need for
affordable housing by building apartments for those experiencing homelessness in a way that
“fits in” but is lacking funding.
Guerilla Development along with JOIN, a local non-profit focused on transitional housing,
launched its first project that’s not only sustainable but also offers affordable housing back in
2020.
“They’re like adult dorms. I refer to them as monastic housing, but it has everything you
possibly need and it’s so much better than a sidewalk sleeping bag,” said Kevin Cavenaugh,
owner of Guerilla Development.
Nestled in the heart of a SE Portland neighborhood off 28th Place and Gladstone sits that
project — “Jolene’s First Cousin.” A pair of colorful buildings that offer retail space on the
bottom and residential on top with a handful of the rooms set aside for people experiencing
homelessness.
RELATED: Portland development company houses the homeless, one apartment building at a
time
Credit: KGW
"Jolene's First Cousin" in SE Portland is Guerilla Development's first project to be powered using renewable energy.
“It’s a lot better than being on the street,” said Marlon Crump, a current resident.
Crump traded in his sleeping bag for one of the studio apartments just after the building
opened.
“It may not be a big, giant apartment…it may not be the Four Seasons but it’s home,” he said.
For people battling homelessness like Crump, transitional housing can be the first real step
forward. But costs for this kind of housing have been climbing, and developers are afraid that
the push for affordable housing won't support this first step.
“I think it’s a manageable amount of people…it’s both residential and commercial its designed
and built in a way that fits in,” said Jock Gurney Kimberley, coordinator with JOIN.
Portland has changed, Cavenaugh said, and to keep up with that change, he is getting ready to
break ground on two more apartment buildings like “Jolene’s First Cousin.”
“I’ve got plans and drawings. I’m shovel ready, but I can’t get out of the ground because of that
bottle neck with money,” he said.
Cavenaugh said he needs roughly about a half million dollars to get the project going. He cites
current interest rates and construction prices "maddening." This while the city of Portland plans
on using $27 million to open three 150-person tent sites.
“I'm saying to myself do you have any idea how much 27 million dollars can get a huge portion
of people off the streets,” said Crump.
Crump has been homeless in Portland for about 11 years now and pays about $450 dollars a
month to live in his studio apartment. He believes affordable housing is what homeless people
need, as opposed to the city’s mass encampments or large-scale shelters.
RELATED: Portland City Council faces packed chamber for testimony on Mayor Ted Wheeler's
homeless plan
“To me a homeless shelter and a bed is not a solution it's not a solution at all,” he said.
“We have so much research that shows that you never break the cycle of poverty by
concentrating poverty,” said Cavenaugh.
The difference between this type of affordable housing and that of Section 8, for example, is
there’s up to a 10 year long waitlist, in part because people need certain documents and must
pass through other barriers. Low-barrier transitional housing projects like Guerilla’s, can take
just a matter of days for someone to get in, yet there needs to be more of them to keep the
momentum going.
“I think the money's out there it's just a matter of identifying the folks who want to participate
and be part of the solution,” said Gurney Kimberley.
Some state lawmakers are proposing to spend $200 million to address homelessness and
build affordable housing. They're hoping that bill passes next month, but it's unclear if private
developers — like Cavenaugh — would see any of that money.
“We used to be a city of doers and I'm questioning that now,” said Cavenaugh.
Related Articles
Vancouver voters pass new tax levy to support affordable housing
Low-income renters in the Portland area are getting priced out of their housing.
Here's why that was always the deal
Is affordable housing really affordable?
PPrriivvaattee ddeevveellooppeerr bbuuiillddss aaffffoorrddaabbllee hhoouussiinngg uunniittss iinn SSoouutthheeaasstt PPoorrttllaanndd
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Neuropathy Has Been Linked To a Common Habit. Do You Do It?
Neuropathy is not from Low Vitamin B. Meet the Real Enemy of Neuropathy (Stop Doing This)
Nerve Health|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Two homeless shelters in Multnomah County set to close in 2026
KGW
FBI says they foiled New Year's Eve terrorist plot in North Carolina
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...