EASTERN OREGON
Eastern Oregonians say they've
been ignored by state leaders for
too long
TThhee VVeenneettiiaann
RReessoorrtt LLaass VVeeggaass
LLaass VVeeggaass,, UUnniitteedd SSttaatteess
The "Greater Idaho" movement has been gaining steam throughout
eastern Oregon. The Story's Pat Dooris headed out east to ask
residents why they want to leave. BBooookk NNooww
FFrroomm $$2200

Author: Pat Dooris
Published: 5:39 PM PDT March 27, 2023
Updated: 9:03 PM PDT March 31, 2023
JOHN DAY, Ore. — The vast expanses of eastern Oregon represent a rural oasis from the urban
sprawl found in much of the Beaver State's western half. For months, many residents in
Oregon's eastern counties have been contemplating a divorce from the west via the so-called
"Greater Idaho" movement. They're fed up to the point that they want to move state borders
and become Idahoans.
Many of these eastern Oregonians feel that the lawmakers and state officials in Salem aren't
listening to their grievances and don't care, but often that's all we hear — we don't hear why
they're so unhappy. So The Story recently launched a listening tour throughout northeastern
Oregon to hear from the residents themselves.
The trek took KGW's Pat Dooris to the small city of John Day and a conversation with the Grant
County Sheriff, then to the property of a Union County rancher who recently lost his dog to re-
introduced gray wolves, with a number of stops along the way. But not everyone he spoke to
expressed readiness to say goodbye to Oregon.
So, what are the issues causing such a fractured state of mind? Could there be middle ground?
That's what Dooris and his crew tried to find out.
Credit: KGW
The view in eastern Oregon along Highway 26, heading out toward John Day.
'A whole different mindset'
Out in eastern Oregon, the Greater Idaho movement is no joke. Eleven of Oregon's 15 eastern
counties have voted in favor of considering the proposal to re-draw state boundaries between
Oregon and Idaho. If successful, it would make the majority of eastern Oregon part of Idaho.
Mike Slinkard is a lifetime resident of Grant County. He's also an entrepreneur, and has his own
bow hunting show that runs on cable channel.
"You know eastern Oregon’s filing for a divorce," Slinkard said, chuckling.
He's convinced that most who live in Oregon's big cities have no idea how different the culture
is where he lives.
"What goes on here is night and day different than what goes on in Portland," he said. "It’s a
whole different experience."
Slinkard's world headquarters are located on a bluff overlooking the town of John Day. The
walls of his office boast trophy heads, animals he's killed as a bow hunter. He doesn't expect
that urban viewers would understand.
Credit: KGW
Hunting photos, trophies and a photo of former President Donald Trump hang in Mike Slinkard's office near John
Day.
"My grandfather and uncle actually were cattle ranchers in the Monument area which is north
Grant County," he said. "And then my dad and his father were all loggers. So I’ve got both sides
of the spectrum for eastern Oregon I guess."
Slinkard's a third generation Oregonian, he said. But when asked how he feels about the state
these days, he got thoughtful.
"You know ... up until about 10 years ago I felt great about it. I was a proud Oregonian. Back in
2000, when I was starting my original business the state was actually very helpful," Slinkard
said. "But now, to us, there’s a lot of craziness going on in the state. We’re getting laws passed
that we don’t agree with. We feel like we really don’t have a lot of representation. We’re getting
taxed way more than we ever have before. And as a business person it makes it very difficult to
be located here. If I didn’t have my roots so deep in Grant County I’d probably already be in
Idaho, to be honest with you. I have my elderly parents I’m taking care of here and things like
that so … ”
Thirteen miles to the east of John Day sits the small town of Prairie City. Its only school houses
kids from preschool through the 12th grade.
Many love the rural culture here. Teachers are understanding about kids showing up late; many
live on ranches or farms and have morning chores, and sometimes the birth of a cow or goat
makes them tardy.
Credit: KGW
Prairie City's school, which houses preschool through 12th grade students.
And there are other cultural differences from the west side, urban schools. Here livestock,
including the school's cows, are not pets.
"They know that those animals are going to go to a butcher shop — they know that someone's
gonna eat them — so it’s a whole different mindset," said Amanda Rockhill. "As opposed to
something you’d have in your backyard. It's just different.”
Rockhill is a teacher and leader of the school's Future Farmers of America program. Her
students raise the school's cows and pigs.
"Its JC’s dad — the girl we just talked to," Rockhill said. "Her dad donated these hogs for our
program. These two will be butchered and the meat will be going to our cafeteria for our entire
school to eat."
One stoplight town
The differences between eastern and western Oregon are many. Locals say that everybody
knows everybody else — which means you can't get away with anything unnoticed. Even on
Main Street, you can leave your F-150 running with no one inside. In all of Grant County there is
just one stoplight, found in the middle of John Day.
Cathy Gill is a server in town. She has a second job working with adults with disabilities. She
loves her part of Oregon.
"I honestly feel we should just have our own eastern Oregon," Gill said. "When you come over
to eastern Oregon people say, 'Oh! This is really pretty — it's Oregon.' No. We’re eastern
Oregon. That’s where we’re at. That's what we call it. And its … God’s country. That’s what
we’ve always called it."
Credit: KGW
The Story's route from Portland all the way out to John Day in Grant County. It's a long trip, and both ends look
wildly different from one another.
Gill said that she's on the fence about whether she supports the Greater Idaho movement. Like
many people KGW met, she says she's certain that urban leaders, including the governor, don't
care about east side opinions.
"I think she should come and listen — and listen to everyone and get everyone’s opinions," Gill
said. "But I don’t think it will change their mind. I don’t. I think they take care of the city people.
The votes are there. You can see it. We don’t have much of a say when it comes to any part of
voting."
Perhaps aware of the stark division in her state, Governor Tina Kotek announced a statewide
listening tour shortly after the election, with the goal of hitting each county in the state within
her first year in office. She just visited her fifth county, but has yet to venture east of the
Cascades.
From a political perspective, Gill is correct that Oregon's urban areas tend to decide who will fill
the governor's office and other statewide roles. During the 2022 election, Republican Christine
Drazan got 3,145 votes in Grant County, or 75% of the total. Kotek got just 576 votes, or 14%.
But the lopsided percentages don't matter much in the grand scheme of things. Oregon's blue
counties, with their densely packed populations, overwhelmingly went for Kotek over Drazan.
In Multnomah County alone, Kotek received nearly 266,000 votes — far more than the entire
populations of the eight counties that the Oregon Employment Department considers to be
eastern Oregon. In total, those counties hold just 191,000 people.
For bow hunter Mike Slinkard and others like him, those numbers mean that Oregon passes
statewide laws that make sense in the cities, but not in the country.
Credit: KGW
Mike Slinkard talks to KGW's Pat Dooris in his office near John Day.
"We’re hard-working people. We use diesel trucks. It’s a long ways between places and we
have to travel," Slinkard said. "And some of things coming down the pike would be hard to deal
with — impossible to deal with out here."
He's referring in part to bills in the Oregon legislature that focus on diesel fuel. Diesel powers a
lot of the pickup trucks on the east side, but also the farm and logging equipment. And it's a big
target for people who want to cut carbon emissions and fight climate change.
Two of the three bills in question will not become law this legislative session, they simply didn't
gain enough traction. But the third bill, Senate Bill 803, worries a lot of people out here. With a
few exceptions, it would outlaw regular diesel statewide in Oregon, requiring the sale of
renewable diesel only by 2030.
"We care about the environment as much as anybody. We live in it. We’re probably closer to the
land than most urban people as well. So we care about it," Slinkard said. "But at the same time,
you’ve gotta, you know, recognize cultural differences and recognize how people have to make
a living in different places, you know?”
Is listening enough?
To these folks, Oregon feels like a marriage that has been in trouble for a long time.
"It really angers people, 'cause we’re just not listened to," said Cathy Gill. "They might come and
visit and see it. But they don’t wanna solve the issues or the problems."
Slinkard isn't sure what Oregon leaders could do to make eastern Oregonians feel differently
about the state of affairs.
"If there was something we could do I think we’d be trying to do it. And I’m not sure what that
is," he said. "I think the divide just feels so huge ... it's just like, it's just like we don’t agree on
what's white and what's red, almost. We can't agree on anything, seems like."
"If there was some effort ... I think our side would be willing to put forth effort, but right now we
don’t feel like there's a reason for them to give effort, 'cause like I say it really is an 'us and
them' thing."
Slinkard named some other things that he's angry about, including Oregon's capital gains tax,
the passage of the gun control initiative Measure 114 and Measure 110, the initiative that
decriminalized user amounts of drugs.
Whether they wanted to join Idaho or not, many of the people KGW spoke with expressed
similar frustrations. It seemed to boil down to this: The culture is dramatically different in rural
areas, and the people who live there have no political power to protect themselves from
statewide laws that they don't support.
This story is part one of a series of stories on eastern Oregon. On Tuesday, The Story will take
a deeper dive into the Greater Idaho movement, meeting the organization's vice chair, and
explore the rural/urban divide.
PART ONE: Eastern Oregonians say they've been ignored by state leaders for too long
PART TWO: What's the appeal of 'Greater Idaho' for eastern Oregonians?
PART THREE: Idaho isn't such a great idea for some disgruntled eastern Oregonians
PART FOUR: 'We still have hope': Eastern Oregon sheriff isn't ready to endorse 'Greater
Idaho' movement
PART FIVE: Union County rancher describes the cost of living in Oregon's wolf country
Related Articles
Oregon taxpayers on the hook for new rail station on Idaho border as costs climb
Eastern Oregon residents oppose energy transmission line project: 'Absolute
disaster for ecosystem'
Malheur County joins Gov. Kotek's homelessness emergency declaration
EEaasstteerrnn OOrreeggoonn rreessiiddeennttss ooppppoossee eenneerrggyy ttrraannssmmiissssiioonn lliinnee oovveerr eennvviirroonnmmeennttaall ……
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
The ‘Free’ Phone Trap
That 'free' iPhone 17 could cost you $1K more than if you'd just switched to Consumer Cellular. Get the
truth here…
Consumer Cellular|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Prada Butterfly Sunglasses, 53mm
Prada Butterfly Sunglasses, 53mm
Bloomingdale's|Sponsored Shop now
Dementia and Memory Loss Has Been Linked To this Common Food - Do You Eat It?
Brain Defender|Sponsored Click Here
Born Before 1977? You Could Get Up To $300 Just For Opening a Checking Account
Sign up in minutes and earn a cash bonus when you make eligible deposits
Forbes|Sponsored Learn More
Judge orders ICE detainee released on the spot after learning he was arrested without
a warrant
KGW
Reports: Tommy Lee Jones' daughter found dead in San Francisco hotel
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...