-26% -39% -40%
THE STORY
The costs and benefits of getting an
-28% -31%
electric vehicle in Oregon
-28%
Some of Oregon's incentives for purchasing EVs aren't active right now,
making it a pricier option. But there's still a big ongoing sea change in
the auto industry.

Author: Pat Dooris, Jamie Parfitt
Published: 5:30 PM PDT April 17, 2023
Updated: 11:17 AM PDT April 18, 2023
PORTLAND, Ore. — With Earth Day coming up on Saturday, this week is "Good Energy" week at
KGW. Part of that coverage begins with looking at how the transition to electric vehicles is
going in Oregon.
The latest numbers from the state of Oregon, updated in November 2022, show more than
60,000 electric or plug-in hybrid vehicles registered in the state. The number is likely even
higher than that by now.
Despite the number of EVs already in the state, there are stiff headwinds to ownership these
days. The first and biggest hurdle is the cost. A graph from the Oregon Department of Energy
shows the issue in rough numbers.
The graph compares two very similar vehicles, where the only real difference is the fuel source:
a 2021 Hyundai Kona ICE vs. a 2021 Hyundai Kona EV. Using what ODE calls "general
numbers," the gas version costs roughly $20,500, while the electric version starts around
$37,300.
Taking these numbers as a baseline, we can expect an EV to cost about $17,000 more than a
comparable gas vehicle.
Credit: Oregon Department of Energy
ODE chart comparing electric and gas vehicles using a 2021 Hyundai Kona ICE vs. a 2021 Hyundai Kona EV.
The federal government offers up to $7,500 in tax credits for EVs, although the list of which
vehicles qualify is changing this week. The state of Oregon offered between $2,500 and
$7,500 in rebates for buying electric, but the program is going to run out of money at the end
of the month and will then go on hold.
There's also the added cost of having to buy a home charger. Utilities offer money to help with
that as well. In the Portland area, Pacific Power and Portland General Electric offer $500, or
$1,000 for people on lower incomes. Those can help, but it remains the more expensive option.
RELATED: No, electric cars are not worse for the environment than gas-powered cars
The electric vehicle market
Regardless, there's a fundamental change underway as more and more political and economic
push will bend towards reducing greenhouse gases and combating climate change.
Someone with a front-row seat to that transformation is Jeff Allen. He's the executive director of
a nonprofit called Forth. Its goal is to get rid of barriers for electric mobility. That may sound
nebulous, but he is certainly a big advocate for electric cars.
"This is an incredibly complicated transition that we're making. And it's easy to get bogged
down in all the things that could go wrong and all the things we're trying to do," Allen said. "But
fundamentally it's an incredibly exciting and optimistic story. Driving an electric car today in the
Pacific Northwest is like driving a car that gets 120 miles per gallon or more. And it's the only
car you can buy that gets cleaner every year you drive it, because the grid is getting cleaner."
Last week, the Biden administration announced new rules through the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency which could have the effect of turbocharging electric car sales.
The proposed rules would cut allowable tailpipe emissions in half. It could mean that within just
nine years, two out of every three new vehicles sold would be electric.
In the meantime, different rules taking effect Tuesday will impact which EVs get a federal tax
credit.
Last summer, The Story's Pat Dooris visited the Herzog-Meier Volkswagen dealership in
Beaverton. He was impressed by the Volkswagen ID.4 electric car — albeit a bit bewildered by
the high-tech dashboard.
"Well this is kinda nice! It tells me how much battery I have there," Dooris remarked. "How far I
can go ... it says I can go 734 miles?"
"Ah, no," the sales person replied. "179 right now. This is the odometer."
"Oh," Dooris said. "Oh, okay!"
Last summer, the biggest challenge was in getting vehicles to show rooms. Supply chain issues
created a waiting list several months long. At the time, the ID.4 — which sells for between
$35,000 and $55,000 — did qualify for the federal tax credit. By Tuesday it will be off that list.
The New York Times reports that this is happening because Volkswagen is still assessing its
supply chain, certifying that the cars are assembled in North America and that key battery parts
come from the continent. The chief executive for Volkswagen Group of America said he does
expect the vehicle to qualify.
NYT reports that Volkswagen had the fourth most popular EV in America over the first quarter
of 2023. The top three makers were Tesla, General Motors and Ford.
The Inflation Reduction Act and EVs
Congress passed the Inflation Reduction Act last August. The bill did a number of things, but
part of it focused on promoting clean energy. When it came to EVs, then, the government is
now only approving tax credits for vehicles from companies that essentially make their
batteries and cars in America.
According to a federal list put out by the government, seven auto companies and 14 vehicles
will qualify for the full $7,500 tax credit. Those include Tesla's Model 3 and Model Y, which are
the best-selling electric vehicles in America. But the least expensive version of the Model 3 is
only getting half of that credit because, according to the NYT, the battery is made in China.
There are also income restrictions that come along with the credit. Buyers cannot make more
than $300,000 as a household. The vehicle has to be assembled in North America, critical
parts of the battery must come from North America or qualifying trade partners and the vehicle
must cost $80,000 or less if its an SUV, van or pickup; $55,000 or less for other vehicles.
To sum up — the auto industry appears to be getting serious about moving to electric, there are
some changes in the tax incentives designed to bring down EV prices and the federal
government is getting more involved in making the transition happen.
Advocates like Allen are urging people to get on board if they can afford to do so.
"It's one of the easiest, quickest, least painful things you can do to reduce your carbon footprint
— and actually, electric cars are better cars right?" he said. "They're faster, they're fun, you don't
have worry about stopping to get gas. So it really is a success story and we are accelerating
that transition at an incredible pace."
Looking down the road
Like California and Washington, Oregon has now committed to phasing out new gas vehicles
by 2035 — it's a big part of the reason why, alongside rising popularity, auto makers are making
an increasing effort to put out competitive new EV options. California alone is a huge market for
vehicles, and its consistently set more stringent emissions standards than the federal
government.
The EV transition ties into a number of other big issues covered by The Story this year. Take
tolling, for instance. A number of viewers have asked why the Oregon Department of
Transportation isn't raising sufficient money for infrastructure projects through the state's gas
tax. While it's only one part of a much larger issue, ODOT is quickly coming to a point at which
gas tax revenues will fall off a cliff.
Right now, the state continues to tax gas vehicles by the gallon, while EV owners pay higher
registration fees to compensate. But, as The Story reported in January, state officials have been
thinking about this issue for years, and there's been a pilot "pay-per-mile" program quietly
running in the background in order to test the viability of a gas tax replacement.
The pay-per-mile program, called OReGO, remains a relatively small initiative without many
takers, and there's no sign just yet that the Oregon Legislature has coalesced behind a plan to
roll out a full version ahead of the big transition in 2035.
Related Articles
AP sources: EPA car rule to push huge increase in EV sales
Portland environmental group sues the Oregon DEQ over harmful algae bloom at
Ross Island
Lloyd District certified as one of only 7 ‘EcoDistricts’ worldwide
OOrreeggoonn DDEEQQ ttoo tteemmppoorraarriillyy ssuussppeenndd EElleeccttrriicc VVeehhiiccllee rreebbaattee pprrooggrraamm
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Melissa Jubane murder case reviewed as former detective faces misconduct charges
KGW
Motorcyclist dies in crash with e-scooter in Southeast Portland
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...