GOOD ENERGY
Portland shelter tackles housing
crisis and climate change together
Path Home is a unique shelter and transitional housing village in the
Lents Neighborhood that is aiming for 100% renewable energy through
on-site solar arrays.

Author: Chris McGinness
Published: 10:04 AM PDT April 20, 2023
Updated: 1:46 PM PDT April 20, 2023
PORTLAND, Oregon — Homelessness and climate change are two of the biggest challenges
facing Oregon today, and a Portland family village campus called Path Home is tackling both of
them head-on. The facility is expanding its footprint to help even more of the city's most
vulnerable, while aiming to power that service through 100% renewable solar energy.
Sponsored Links
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop
Losing Weight
Wellness Daily Learn More
SHOP NOW
"When I showed up here, I said 'Oh my gosh, this is the moonshot. This is what we're going for,'"
said Brandi Tuck, executive director of Path Home.
After seeing the property in 2017, she and her team raised three-million dollars to buy the patch
of land, nearly an acre and a half, including an old church on Southeast 92nd Avenue in the
Lents neighborhood.
Credit: KGW
The church that Path Home has converted into a resource center for homeless people.
"We really want to be a one-stop shop where families can get all the tools, resources, and
relationships that they need to truly end homelessness for good," Tuck said.
-40%
Prada Butterfly Dolce & Gabbana
Sunglasses, 53mm Square Sunglasses, 54mm
$563 $273
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
Path Home provides both emergency shelter and transitional housing. The campus is tailored
to the needs of families with kids who have spent time on the streets, using trauma-informed
design.
"Trauma-informed design and architecture is a specific kind of design that helps people heal
from the crisis and trauma of homelessness," Tuck explained.
Low-height room dividers give a sense of privacy, glass doors offer more peace of mind in
knowing when someone is coming or going. Big windows, natural light and soft colors are all
purposeful choices, meant to rewire the mind and heal trauma.
Credit: KGW
The bright, divided interior of Path Home's converted church.
The site's design has a second goal, Tuck said: Making the campus as energy efficient and as
green as possible. Working with Elemental Energy, the village was able to secure nearly
$100,000 in grants and rebates to install a 102-panel solar array atop the old church.
The highly visible array on the large west-facing roof is "really a great reminder for everyone,"
said Zach Parrott, a solar developer with Elemental Energy. The array should offset about 70%
of the energy usage at Path Home.
Credit: KGW
Solar panels cover the west-facing side of Path Home's roof.
"The power being produced will go into the electric panel, will go out to any of the appliances
or lights that's being used right now, and then any excess will go back to the grid," he said.
Path Home is still expanding, and when finished, the campus will have a brand new multi-story
building with shelter, transitional housing, and at least two dozen units of permanent housing,
with wrap around services to help keep clients in their homes for good.
Chris McGinness is a meteorologist and reporter for KGW. Got a story idea or a great photo
you want to share? Email him at cmcginness@kgw.com or reach out
on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
Related Articles
First US auction to develop floating, offshore wind farms off the West Coast
How to make the most of Oregon's new home energy tax credits
A look at Portland's drug crisis through the eyes of families trying to find their loved ones
on the streets
FFiirrsstt--ooff--iittss--kkiinndd ffaacciilliittyy iinn OOrreeggoonn ssttoorreess wwiinndd aanndd ssoollaarr ppoowweerr
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
Cardiologist's Discovery: The Secret to Rapid Weight Loss
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Salvatore Ferragamo Square Sunglasses, 54mm
Salvatore Ferragamo Square Sunglasses, 54mm
Bloomingdale's|Sponsored Shop now
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Man accused of Safeway stabbing linked to 2017 MAX train platform attack
KGW
Mt. Hood Meadows suspends operations Friday and Saturday
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...