-30%
SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
Drug treatment in Oregon still hitting
a bottleneck at inpatient care
Measure 110 has helped support an expansion in substance use outreach throughout Oregon, but there
are only so many inpatient drug treatment beds to go around.
Jamie Parfitt
Play Vi
MEASURE 110 AND THE MORE BANG FOR THE BEDS IN DEMAND STUDY AND STUDY AGAIN
DETOX DEFICIT BUCK
Inside inpatient treatment Where the state fits in
What doesn't get funded A Measure 110 rebuttal
and why
Published: 6:11 PM PDT August 14, 2023
Updated: 4:27 PM PDT August 15, 2023
PORTLAND, Ore.
A
mid a mounting crisis of substance use and overdoses in Oregon, millions more
dollars every year are now flowing toward programs meant to help people kick
their addictions and get back on their feet thanks to Measure 110. But an important
link in the chain, inpatient drug withdrawal management, formerly known as detox,
remains a bottleneck that this funding has thus far done little to ease.
Within the past year, KGW reporters have shadowed outreach workers as they attempted to
make contact with people suffering from addiction on the streets, in Portland and beyond. But
after making those contacts, workers are often confronted by another major challenge —
trying to connect people with beds in an inpatient facility so that they can get through
withdrawal, the brutal first step toward getting sober.
Inpatient withdrawal management is rarely, if ever, immediately available.
RELATED: A look at Portland's drug crisis through the eyes of families trying to find their
loved ones on the streets
At Hooper Detoxification Stabilization Center in North Portland, inpatient admission opens for
just an hour each weekday, from 6:45 to 7:45 a.m. At detox facilities like Hooper, people
often line up at the door each morning for a chance at an open bed.
This is in Portland, where there are at least two such large-scale withdrawal management
facilities, even if they're always operating at capacity. Other parts of Oregon aren't so lucky,
which makes it much more difficult for outreach workers to get people into detox.
As of a March 2019 report — prior to Measure 110 — there were 13 withdrawal management
facilities licensed with the Oregon Health Authority, for a total of 201 beds. Those facilities
were located in just nine of Oregon's 36 counties.
According to OHA data obtained through a records request this month, there are now 22
withdrawal management facilities licensed with the state — although some are incredibly
small and three even share a campus — with a total capacity of 308 beds. The facilities are
now located in 14 counties.
It's a significant improvement. But it still isn't enough to keep up with the need.
OOuuttrreeaacchh wwoorrkkeerrss iinn TThhee DDaalllleess ttrryy ttoo ccoonnnneecctt ppeeooppllee wwiitthh ddrruugg ttrreeaattmmeenntt sseerrvviicceess
MEASURE 110 AND THE DETOX DEFICIT
What doesn't get funded and why
B
B
efore voters approved Measure 110 in the November 2020 election, proponents
billed it as a way to expand and support drug treatment programs while working to
eliminate the stigma and oft-lopsided criminal justice outcomes for members of
marginalized groups.
From Oregon's cannabis taxes, Measure 110 reallocated about $300 million to support drug
treatment programs, although the rollout saw major delays and most of that funding didn't
truly get out the door until late 2022.
RELATED: Measure 110's drug treatment rollout suffered from ambiguity, audit finds
Setting aside the controversies around Measure 110's decriminalization of drugs in user
quantities, critics have since pointed out another issue with the program — the fact that
inpatient drug treatment in Oregon, including withdrawal management, doesn't seem to be
benefiting directly from all of those millions of dollars.
The "why" of it seems to depend on who you ask.
For some, it's a fairly simple answer. In a June 2022 presentation shown to a Jackson County
public safety coordinating council, the CEO of a southern Oregon drug treatment center
outlined three things that she said are just flat-out ineligible for Measure 110 funding: medical
withdrawal management, residential treatment and mental health services.
While it's difficult to pin down from the documentation surrounding Measure 110 why this
would be the case — none of this is stated explicitly — one source explained on background
that these three services are not considered "low-barrier" sources of treatment.
To explain this interpretation, it's necessary to dive into Measure 110 a little to explain that key
term: low-barrier.
Nowhere in the original Measure 110 text, or in the amended version brought about by 2021's
Senate Bill 755, are inpatient services even mentioned as distinct from outpatient services.
The term that's used repeatedly is "low-barrier substance use disorder treatment."
Credit: AP
Signs at a drug treatment center show where receptacles used to dispense methadone should be disposed of
after use. (AP Photo/Andrew Selsky, File)
Although the definition of that kind of treatment is a bit nebulous, the Oregon administrative
rules adopted to govern Measure 110 provide a list of practices that this kind of treatment
must meet to qualify for grant funding — services that are trauma-informed, have little in the
way of wait times, and are provided regardless of criminal history, residency or ability to pay,
among other requirements.
That's where the issue comes in for withdrawal management and these other services, to hear
some providers tell it.
In order to qualify for services, people who show up for these kinds of treatment have to be
evaluated on the seriousness of their needs according to a set of criteria established by the
American Society of Addiction Medicine, which will determine whether or not they can access
those services, one provider said. That's the first potential wrinkle — programs supported by
Measure 110 grants are supposed to help anyone who walks in by figuring out their needs and
setting them up with the right services.
The second problem is that withdrawal management, residential care and mental health
treatment providers have limited capacity all throughout the state of Oregon, which means
they often have waitlists. By Measure 110's standards, being made to wait for care is not low-
barrier. The Measure 110 rules actually require that a patient receive treatment services within
48 hours of their initial assessment.
If this interpretation is correct, then Measure 110's rules and the current landscape of drug
treatment pose something of a Catch 22. Sticking with withdrawal management as an
example — there aren't enough treatment beds to meet the current need, creating waitlists
and the need to triage patients. But if the waitlists and assessment criteria are part of the
reason that detox programs can't benefit from Measure 110 funding, then they aren't any more
likely to expand and meet the need.
MORE BANG FOR THE BUCK
A Measure 110 rebuttal
O'
Nesha Cochran, a tri-chair for Measure 110's Oversight and Accountability
Council, seemed willing to acknowledge the problem of having too little in the
way of inpatient services, but completely disagreed with this understanding
that medical withdrawal management, residential treatment and mental health
services are simply ineligible for funding.
"This isn't true; we funded programs similar to this," she said in an email. "People with mental
health and (substance use disorders) should be able to access low-barrier programs. So we
wanted to inspire organizations to create low-barrier access. These people are already
dealing with enough, why make it hard to get care?"
All of the drug treatment programs that Measure 110 funded have to do mental health
assessments that use the aforementioned ASAM criteria, Cochran added, so this wouldn't be
a reason in and of itself why a program wouldn't be considered low-barrier.
Cochran instead described the detox deficit as a multifaceted issue. First, inpatient drug
treatment centers generally require a great deal of upfront costs in order to get set up and
operating. They need qualified medical staff on-site and available 24/7. The Measure 110
grants, while generous compared to what existed before, aren't enough to bankroll a brand
new withdrawal management center.
"It's mind-boggling to think about how much inpatient treatment costs," Cochran said. "So the
reason why Measure 110 was created is like, people weren't being successful with that type of
model. When people think of $300 million they say, 'Well (that's) a lot of money.' But not when
you're splitting it with the entire state of Oregon."
Credit: KGW
O'Nesha Cochran is a tri-chair for the Measure 110 Oversight & Accountability Council and community liaison for
Miracles Club in Portland.
The grants also don't work particularly well for day-to-day operations at an inpatient facility,
according to Cochran. Because they are provided up-front, grants simply can't account for
patients' different lengths of stay or any unexpected incidents that arise.
"Say somebody got bed bugs in the treatment place, then you've got to shut the whole
treatment facility down and you've got to do hazmat services for bed bugs," Cochran said.
"But you can't really write that into a grant for Measure 110 because ... how can you say, 'I
know I might get bed bugs so I need to put $75,000 for an 18-month stay just in case I've got
bed bugs.'"
Most organizations that are already up and running to provide inpatient withdrawal
management bill those services to Medicaid, or the state's Oregon Health Plan, which
reimburse the facility for the people they treat, as they treat them. Importantly, the Measure
110 grants can't be used to pay for anything that organizations already bill to insurance.
That caveat about insurance is another reason why there's been some confusion about
whether Measure 110 can benefit things like inpatient treatment. While it's clear that the grants
can't take the place of that insurance model, it's less clear from the documentation whether
they can be used around it; helping inpatient providers with startup, expansion or to fill other
gaps. Cochran said that Measure 110 has done just that, but not everyone is on the same
page.
Credit: KGW
Fora Health in Southeast Portland is one of two large-scale withdrawal management facilities in the city. Hooper
Detox is the other.
"What Measure 110 did ... it didn't not fund treatment beds. It funded organizations that already
had the infrastructure to bill Medicaid, and they had treatment beds," Cochran explained. "But
we had a few organizations that were super brand new, and they had these amazing ideals to
have these treatment beds, but they didn't have the infrastructure to implement (them) at the
rate that they're used."
Measure 110 also wasn't specifically tailored to boost inpatient services. Behavioral Health
Resource Networks (BHRNs, pronounced like "burns"), what Measure 110 originally called
Addiction Recovery Centers, are supposed to provide a broad spectrum of services rather
than something specific, like inpatient withdrawal management or residential care. While
BHRNs in more populous counties might be made up of multiple separate nonprofits that
provide different services, rural counties are more likely to have just one or two trying to cover
the spread.
And, as Cochran mentioned, making those services low-barrier was a high priority. According
to her, the Measure 110 council set out with the intention that each of these BHRNS would
include inpatient treatment. But it isn't something that the program required, and it isn't how
things materialized.
How it has worked in practice is that most of the organizations funded by Measure 110 provide
outreach, harm reduction supplies and outpatient services — meaning people in recovery can
come in to receive medication-assisted treatment and support but aren't staying overnight —
and help with transitional housing or employment, among other things. Inpatient treatment is
rarely on the list, with some exceptions.
MMeeaassuurree 111100 ffuunnddss nneeww ddeettooxx pprrooggrraamm aatt DDeesscchhuutteess CCoouunnttyy jjaaiill
Cochran suggested that Measure 110 funding can go further by using a workaround. Some
organizations are pairing outpatient drug treatment with transitional housing, something like a
halfway house where people seeking services can still get a place to stay while working to
kick their addiction.
"And it's cheaper because now all we have to pay for is the brick and mortar," Cochran said.
"We're not talking about a treatment bed, so what we're encouraging individuals to do is get
on (the Oregon Health Plan), take care of their own treatment needs to be self-sufficient in
that way, go out and get jobs, they can have a peer recovery mentor, they can get outpatient
treatment to get support to stay clean."
RELATED: Blanchet House peer support specialist a ‘living example’ of a way out of
addiction, homelessness
For Cochran, this is personal. After decades spent in and out of jail or prison, it wasn't
inpatient treatment that helped her kick substance use — it was the place she now works,
Miracles Club in Northeast Portland, and the peers she met there. Miracles Club is a recipient
of Measure 110 grants, and she thinks those funds are being put to good use.
"I appreciate people saying we still need treatment beds, and Measure 110 did fund a lot, but
we need to rethink how we're going to impact more treatment beds," Cochran added. "And
maybe the solution to that is to support the infrastructure of the treatment beds that already
exist."
The legislature successfully passed a bill this session, House Bill 2513, containing some
modest reforms to Measure 110. The workgroup that developed the bill hoped to clarify some
of the murky territory uncovered during the rollout, much of which arose from different
interpretations of the law by both drug treatment providers and by members of the oversight
council who decided which organizations would become grant recipients.
Included in the bill are some relatively subtle tweaks to Measure 110 in regards to the kinds of
programs that are eligible for funding, but the bill is primarily a response to the results of a
Secretary of State's office audit delivered earlier this year that found fault with how Measure
110's oversight council and the OHA collaborated in the early days of the rollout.
Under HB 2513, the OHA now has a larger role in administration of Measure 110, and more
funding with which to do it — which could help eliminate some of the ambiguity around
eligibility in future grants.
BEDS IN DEMAND
Inside inpatient treatment
O
n an average morning, as people line up at the door of Hooper Detox in North
Portland for a chance at a treatment bed, the facility is able to admit about 14.
That's according to Dr. Amanda Risser, Central City Concern's senior medical
director for substance use disorder services. It's a 60-bed facility, the largest of its
kind in the state.
The patients who get in and secure a bed usually stay an average of five days, receiving
medication to help ease withdrawal symptoms, plus round-the-clock monitoring and support.
At the end of their stay, some of them are ushered on to either residential care or continuing
outpatient treatment, if possible. Others simply go home, or go back to the street. It depends
on what patients want and what services are available at the time.
But not everyone who shows up at Hooper on a given day will get a bed. People regularly do
get turned away, although it's perhaps not as bad as it once was.
"Back in the day, when Hooper first opened, there were stories of people just showing up
every day for seven days straight, trying to get into Hooper, and they'd have to just keep
coming back," Risser said. "And that is not what we want. We know when people want
treatment, the closer the period of time is between asking for and receiving treatment, (it)
improves outcomes."
Credit: KGW
Dr. Amanda Risser, senior medical director of substance use disorder services at Central City Concern.
There is also a certain amount of triage that Hooper's staff must do for prospective patients.
Some people, Risser acknowledged, just don't fit the ASAM criteria for this level of inpatient
withdrawal management and are instead referred to other programs that might be a better fit.
Most days, at least some people who show up at Hooper for treatment are turned away just
due to capacity limits, Risser said. Last year, Hooper admitted about 2,700 people and turned
away 2,100. Things are looking up this year, she said — admissions are creeping over 3,000,
with less than 2,000 people turned away.
While Risser is of the opinion that Hooper is a relatively low-barrier service, and Central City
Concern as a whole provides a spectrum of services that is probably unparalleled in the state
of Oregon, it's not entirely clear that the inpatient treatment center meets Measure 110's
definition of low-barrier.
"A lot of the guiding principals around Measure 110's design were something like — somebody
walks in the door, we have services to provide them no matter what they need at all times of
the day," Risser said.
Though Central City Concern strives to provide services that are easy for people to access, a
priority they share with the designers of Measure 110, there are just some inherent limitations
to inpatient care of the kind that Hooper offers.
"It's hard for me to imagine a one-stop shop where you could be admitted for withdrawal
management and, you know, get admitted for a wide variety of services," she said. "I think
we're pretty close, though, because we have such a broad spectrum of offerings at Central
City Concern."
Credit: Central City Concern
The Blackburn Center, operated by Central City Concern, offers stable housing and support services all in one.
Central City decided against applying for Measure 110 funding for Hooper, Risser said,
although they did apply on behalf of other programs and succeeded in getting grants.
"The easiest funds to access were starting things new and from scratch," she said. "So we'd
love to renovate our building, we'd love to add a bunch of beds, and we evaluated whether
Hooper would be an appropriate place to apply for Measure 110 funding and we decided not
to — we decided what we would get was not worth the time and energy, and there were other
ways to get our needs met in terms of funding."
And regardless, those Measure 110 funds are filling a need, Risser indicated. People usually
show up to Hooper because they need that significant level of care. Many other people with
substance use disorders, perhaps the majority, don't need inpatient withdrawal management
and will be better served elsewhere.
But at the end of the day, Oregon is still suffering from a deficit of inpatient care, Risser
underlined — and not just in withdrawal management.
"There's not enough capacity for treatment in our whole state," she said. "We need more
programs that can admit our patients in a timely manner for outpatient treatment, we need
more residential beds ... and we need a wider variety of beds, maybe that can meet the needs
of people with disabilities, maybe folks with more serious mental health issues."
RELATED: Portland makes long-awaited strides toward replacing sobering station
shuttered in 2020
The need for these longer-term forms of residential care is growing, Risser said, because the
behavioral health and medical care conditions that professionals are seeing these days are
getting more complex and more pronounced. She attributed this to the COVID-19 pandemic,
to the changing supply of street drugs and to the compounding effects of Oregon's ongoing
lack of access to care.
"Measure 110 was part of the solution, and I'm really glad my patients have less criminal justice
burden when they come into treatment, because that can be really disruptive," Risser said. "I
think our workforce is really in crisis, and I think any effort we can make to make training
lower-barrier for individuals, to make these jobs better compensated and more attractive ...
things that people really want to do and want to do long-term I think would be really helpful.
So I think money is a big part of that."
The problem of capacity at a facility like Hooper, for example, sometimes is just a matter of not
having enough physical beds or space to treat more people. But at other times — perhaps
more commonly at other facilities, Risser indicated — it's a matter of not having the necessary
staff to care for more patients. That's a problem being felt across the behavioral health field.
And housing will need to be a big part of any solution, Risser added. Substance use can be a
coping mechanism for people living on the streets, making it much more difficult for them to
get or stay sober even if they want to get help.
TThhee sseeaarrcchh ffoorr ssoonnss aanndd bbrrootthheerrss lloosstt ttoo aaddddiiccttiioonn iinn ddoowwnnttoowwnn PPoorrttllaanndd
RELATED: At the intersection of homelessness, mental illness and addiction in Portland lies
psychosis
STUDY AND STUDY AGAIN
Where the state fits in
S
tate officials have known for years about Oregon's overall lack of capacity for drug
treatment and "significant waiting lists" at withdrawal management facilities in
particular. In 2017, the legislature passed Senate Bill 1041, which directed the Oregon
Criminal Justice Commission to study the state's publicly-funded substance use
treatment infrastructure. The commission delivered the resulting report in March 2019.
"While Oregon struggles with some of the highest substance abuse and mental health
problems in the country, access to services ranks among the poorest of all states," the report
states. "Oregon now ranks third nationally with the highest number of people needing but not
receiving treatment for alcohol and substance use disorders."
That awareness hasn't gone away. In 2021, lawmakers allocated $1.35 billion for Oregon's
behavioral health system, intended to be a "transformative" investment in those systems
through 2023. Of those funds, $67 million was specifically earmarked for projects to increase
the number of behavioral health beds in Oregon.
"We’re grateful for the legislature’s historic increase in behavioral health funding, which is
helping to correct years of underinvestment," said Steve Allen, then-director of behavioral
health at the Oregon Health Authority, in a statement accompanying a 2022 update. "We have
more work to do, but we’re building a system that can address the full range of services
people need to get in treatment, sustain their recovery and lead full and productive lives.”
During this year's legislative session, lawmakers approved another $164 million intended to
expand Oregon's behavioral health offerings — although much of that funding is earmarked
for specific initiatives, only some of it related to inpatient care.
RELATED: Gov. Kotek signs six bills aimed at addressing Oregon's mental health, addiction
issues
Credit: Office of the Governor
But first, another study. The Oregon Health Authority announced July 5 that state health
officials have launched a review of the state's residential mental health and substance use
treatment capacity to identify gaps and guide those investments from the legislature.
"The study will inform the state’s five-year plan to expand behavioral health treatment and
build a more accessible, effective and equitable system of care," OHA said in a statement.
A contracted consulting firm will look at the amount of treatment and residential care beds in
Oregon and determine how many are needed, analyze how much money should go toward
expansion versus sustaining what's already there and looking at outcomes of prior behavioral
health investments.
OHA said that this assessment will build on yet another study, one completed in 2022 by the
OHSU-PSU School of Public Health, which also looked at the "significant service gaps" in
Oregon's behavioral health system.
"The data shows the state would need to double its services to adequately address the
current health needs of Oregonians struggling with addiction and also highlights significant
gaps in healthy equity, including access to services and availability of culturally relevant care,"
OHSU said in a September statement.
It's unclear when this new study will be completed so that funding can go out, but there can
be little doubt that this funding is not enough to double Oregon's drug treatment services.
“We are moving urgently to complete this effort," said OHA Behavioral Health Director Ebony
Clarke in a statement. "We must find effective solutions to expand treatment and put more
people on the path to recovery.”
Editor's note: On August 18, a nonprofit called Recovery Works Northwest unveiled a new 16-
bed detox facility in Southeast Portland, which they say is the first of its kind in the state to
open with Measure 110 backing.
The Story airs at 6:30 p.m. every weekday on KGW. Got a question or comment for the team?
Shoot an email to thestory@kgw.com or call and leave a voicemail at 503-226-5090.
Related Articles
A look at Portland's drug crisis through the eyes of families trying to find their
loved ones on the streets
Did Measure 110 take away 'rock bottom'? Oregon cops seem to think so
'Portland sucked the life out of her': Mother searches downtown Portland for her
homeless daughter
PPoorrttllaanndd ddrruugg ddeettooxx cceenntteerrss aarree ttuurrnniinngg ppeeooppllee aawwaayy dduuee ttoo aa llaacckk ooff bbeeddss