LOCAL NEWS
Eugene electrification ordinance
headed to ballot after NW Natural
funds signature-gathering
campaign
Voters will weigh in on Eugene's decision to ban natural gas in new
homes. Opponents say the ban was rushed. Advocates say it's crucial
to fight climate change.

Author: Kale Williams
Published: 7:03 PM PDT March 23, 2023
Updated: 7:03 PM PDT March 23, 2023
EUGENE, Ore. —
When Eugene passed its electrification ordinance in early February, it became the first city in
Oregon to ban natural gas hookups in new residential construction.
But the fate of that policy is now very much in question after a signature-gathering campaign,
bankrolled by the state's largest natural gas utility, is set to force a city-wide vote on the issue.
Aya Cockram, coalition coordinator for Fossil Free Eugene, which advocated strongly for the
electrification policy, was taken aback by the campaign to put it to a vote.
"We were definitely expecting a fight, but we were not expecting this level of a fight," Cockram
said.
In Eugene, an ordinance approved by the city council can be put to a city-wide vote if
opponents can gather enough signatures. In this case, 6,460 signatures were needed to get
the measure on the ballot.
Soon after the policy was approved, a group called Eugene Residents for Energy Choice began
collecting signatures and, on March 9, submitted more than 12,000.
EEuuggeennee fifirrsstt OOrreeggoonn cciittyy ttoo pphhaassee oouutt nnaattuurraall ggaass uussee iinn nneeww hhoommeess
But Cockram said it would be a mistake to think of the group as just Eugene residents who
want to be able to choose how they heat their homes.
"They are almost solely funded by Northwest Natural. At our last count, I believe Northwest
Natural had donated about $1 million to this group," Cockram said, noting that the group’s
registered address is in Portland.
Records from the Secretary of State’s office show that the state's largest natural gas utility
contributed more than $950,000 to the group over about six weeks. All other contributions to
Eugene Residents for Energy Choice, combined, total just $165.
And some of Northwest Natural's contributions were "in-kind," Cockram pointed out, meaning
the utility donated services to the group in addition to cash.
"So if Northwest Natural is funding it, and if they're managing it, and if they're not even located
in Eugene, I think that says pretty clearly that this is not a grassroots organization," Cockram
said.
Jeff McGillivray, a member of the group and a business agent with the local plumbers and
steamfitters union, said the group's membership includes multiple unions, trade groups and
representatives of the travel and lodging industry, as well as farmers and farmworkers.
McGillivray said his union likely would have supported the signature-gathering campaign
financially, but donations have to be approved by an executive board.
"There wasn't time for us to pitch in initially on this, though we do support it and we were happy
that there was somebody there that could get this done," he said.
Northwest Natural hasn't tried to hide its involvement in the issue.
"We believe Eugene voters should have a say on this decision, which is why NW Natural is
supporting a signature gathering campaign to get the Council's decision to ban gas in new
homes on the ballot," the company said in a statement, adding that "this effort is not paid for by
NW Natural customers."
Related Articles
NW Natural customers will see rate increase
Oregon Rep. calls for increased oversight of NW Natural after scientist fails to
disclose she was paid for testimony
Fossil fuel industry groups, state of Montana sue Portland over infrastructure rules
The utility raises two primary points in its opposition to the ordinance. First, they cite a 2022
poll, conducted on their behalf, showing that 70% or Eugene residents polled "oppose a ban on
new natural gas hookups in all homes and buildings."
Jennifer Yeh, a city council member who voted in favor of the ordinance, said the poll was
misleading, as the city's policy only bans natural gas in new residential construction. She also
noted that in talking to her constituents, taking action on climate change has been a priority for
many years.
"What we do know is over decades of talking to our community, climate change action is
always a priority," Yeh said.
The second point Northwest Natural — and representatives of Eugene Residents for Energy
Choice — raise comes from a set of slides displayed at a city work session on the ordinance
from July of 2022. In it, a pie chart shows residential natural gas emissions in 2037 as 0.1% of
the city's total.
Credit: City of Eugene
In a recording of the meeting, councilor Mike Clark asks city staff if that figure represents the
estimated reduction in emissions if the ordinance were to be put in place and city staff confirm
that it does.
"The climate analysis the city published to support this ban is one tenth of one percent of an
emissions reduction benefit in 2037," Northwest Natural said in a statement.
But Ian Penn, sustainability manager for the city, wrote in a letter to state lawmakers that "the
statement from NW Natural...mischaracterizes both the graphic and the information it
represents."
The Rocky Mountain Institute, a nonprofit focused on sustainable energy, performed its own
analysis of the ordinance and, when factoring in Oregon's commitment to have 100%
renewable energy sources by 2040, it found that "the emissions reduction for an all-electric
home was found to be 50%, a reduction of 25 metric tons of CO2, over a 15-year period."
But for Yeh, the greater concern is what she’s been hearing from her constituents about how
some of the signatures were gathered.
"We've seen folks out trying to gather signatures, trying to imply that this would affect people in
their homes that are already built, that this would somehow affect business or industries," Yeh
said. "By conflating all these things, it confuses people. It’s building off of people's fears that
there might be some sudden change to their lifestyles."
Anne Marie Levis, a spokeswoman for Eugene Residents for Energy Choice, flatly denied that
the group was spreading misinformation.
Still, Yeh stressed that it was important for voters to know what the policy would
and wouldn’t do.
"No one is being asked to change what they’re doing right now," she said. "Everything will
remain the same. If you are using (natural gas) to cook your food or heat your home or if you
have a fireplace, however you are trying to use it, this ordinance changes none of that."
Milla Vogelezang-Liu, a junior at South Eugene High School and co-president of the
school’s climate action club, has been active in efforts to get the electrification ordinance
passed. She now worries that her inability to vote will exclude her voice from the process.
"Youth climate activists like myself have been testifying at City Council and working to get the
electrification ordinance passed for over two years now and if it goes to the ballot, our voices
will be silenced," she said. "They're pretty much eliminating our voices in this issue when it's
going to concern us most since it's our futures that are going to be most impacted by the
climate crisis."
PPoorrttllaanndd ssttuuddeennttss rraallllyy ffoorr cclliimmaattee jjuussttiiccee
But McGillivray said he felt unheard when the council passed the measure directly, and
wonders why the council didn't put such a consequential measure up for a city-wide vote in the
first place.
"I still don't understand the fear of letting the citizens Eugene speak," he said. "That's
democracy at it's simplest form and not letting them speak their voices, I think is irresponsible
of the council."
Cockram, with Fossil Free Eugene, sees it much differently. Eugene is the first city in the state
attempting to eliminate natural gas from new residential construction, she said, which means
Northwest Natural is trying to set a precedent.
"If they win here, this could become the norm," Cockram said. "When they are no longer able to
buy their way out of progressive policies through campaign contributions alone, they are
increasingly turning to these ballot referendum campaigns."
It isn't clear yet when the policy will go on the ballot — the city next has elections in May and
November.
Levis said the number of signatures her organization was able to gather shows that the vote is
in the city's best interest.
"Our coalition believes that decisions like this need to be made thoughtfully," she said. "When
that wasn't done, we worked to make sure it was referred to voters by gathering almost 13,000
signatures. That shows a level of commitment from the community to weigh in on this issue."
Cockram remained confident that the policy would be approved by voters.
"Eugene will not be bullied by a fossil fuel company," she said. "We will just vote this policy back
in again."
Related Articles
Here's how Oregon plans to replace the gas tax as cars go electric
Eugene first Oregon city to phase out gas use in new homes
MMiillwwaauukkiiee bbeeccoommeess sseeccoonndd--llaarrggeesstt OOrreeggoonn cciittyy ttoo ppaassss nnaattuurraall ggaass bbaann rreessoolluutt……
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
PORTAL NEWS: Indiana in PRIME position to LAND Nick Marsh, WR transfer from
Michigan State
KGW
FBI says it disrupted a New Year's Eve attack plan inspired by Islamic State group
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...