Dexcom - Sponsored
An easier way to manage diabetes Discover More ⌃
STRAIGHT TALK
McLeod-Skinner and Chavez-
DeRemer make their pitches to 5th
District voters
Republican Lori Chavez-DeRemer says voters are clamoring for political
change while Democrat Jamie McLeod-Skinner says she can bring
people together for solutions.

Author: Laural Porter
Published: 2:11 PM PDT October 7, 2022
Updated: 2:31 PM PDT October 7, 2022
PORTLAND, Ore. — With the balance of power on the line in Congress, Oregon's hotly
contested 5th Congressional District race is in the national spotlight — and polls currently show
a contest that's too close to call.
Democrat Jamie McLeod-Skinner, who defeated incumbent Rep. Kurt Schrader in the May
primary, is going head-to-head with Republican Lori Chavez-DeRemer. One certainty in the race
is that Oregon will add another woman to its Congressional delegation to join Democrat
Suzanne Bonamici, who represents the state's 1st Congressional District.
McLeod-Skinner is a Terrebonne attorney and part-time emergency preparedness coordinator,
as well as a board member of the Jefferson County Education District.
Chavez-DeRemer served as mayor of Happy Valley from 2010 to 2018. She and her husband
co-founded Anesthesia Associates Northwest and own health and wellness clinics that treat
drug resistant depression.
RELATED: Jamie McLeod-Skinner defeats Kurt Schrader in Oregon Democratic primary
The two candidates appeared separately on this week's edition of Straight Talk to make their
case to voters on why they believe they are the best fit for the vast and diverse 5th District.
The district was redrawn by Democratic legislators last year after the 2020 census. It stretches
from Portland in Multnomah County across the Cascade mountains to Sunriver in Deschutes
County.
$45.00
Change and experience
Chavez-DeRemer said she's the clear choice for voters when they ask themselves if they are
better off today than they were two years or ten years ago. People on the campaign trail have
told her they're ready for a change in political leadership, she said.
"We see that with one party rule you tend not to have a voice at the table, and I think people
are ready for change... we see a lot of issues people are addressing," she said. "The economy,
inflation, crime, education — all of those things people are talking about... people are clamoring
for change."
McLeod Skinner said her experience on the ground, including wildfire recovery work, makes
her the better choice.
"It's the experience, it's the serious leadership, it's the track record," she said. "And a
commitment not just to work on our economic issues, being able to address climate change,
but also protecting our democracy, protecting our personal freedoms. There's a clear
distinction in all these areas.".
Tackling inflation
On the issue of how to address soaring inflations rates — the kind the nation hasn't seen in 40
years — Chavez-DeRemer said she would focus on a foundation to grow the U.S. and Oregon
economies.
"Creating more jobs, being job creators. I want to make sure when I get back to DC that people
know Oregon is on the map," she said. "We need to be a better job creator. We have to keep
regulations low. And we have to keep taxes low... small businesses have been hurting."
RELATED: As inflation keeps climbing, these prices soared the most in Portland
McLeod-Skinner said attacking inflation will require both long-term and short-term approaches.
In the short term, the nation needs to address cost of living issues, the cost of housing and the
cost of prescription drugs, she said. The high cost of gas is caused in part by unscheduled
closures at west coast refineries, she added.
"If anyone is really serious about the price of gas, we should all be outraged by that," she said.
In the long term, McLeod-Skinner said she'd work on addressing supply chain issues and
investing in a 21st century clean energy economy.
Pitch to voters
Chavez-DeRemer said the best solutions come when everyone has a place and voice at the
table, and she called for an end to one-party rule.
"This is going to be a referendum and a chance to vote this election to change the direction of
Oregon and to change the direction of this country," she said.
McLeod-Skinner said the district needs a representative who has experience working across
the political divide.
"I do that all the time in Central Oregon. That's how I've been successful," she said. "We need to
protect our personal freedoms. We also need to make sure we address the economic issues,
the climate crisis, wildfire, drought, flooding, all those things Oregonians are struggling with."
The candidates also talked about reducing homelessness, as well as their positions on gun
safety, crime reduction and abortion, and where they see themselves on the political spectrum.
Straight Talk airs Friday at 7pm, Sunday morning at 9:30 after Meet the Press, and 9:30pm.
Straight Talk is also available as a podcast.
404
We can't seem to find what you're looking for.
CChhaarrtteerr rreeffoorrmm aaddvvooccaatteess aanndd ooppppoonneennttss mmaakkee tthheeiirr ccaasseess ttoo PPoorrttllaannddeerrss
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
BREAKING: Is Illinois in an SEC Battle for THIS Quarterback? | Penn St Preview | Illini
Podcast
KGW
Mt. Hood Meadows suspends operations Friday and Saturday
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...