BUSINESS
30-story tower proposed in
-28% -31%
downtown Portland
-28%
The developer is still in the very early stages — but if they pull it off,
Burnside One would become one of Portland's largest affordable
housing developments.
AAAddd : 11(0 o:o0ff5 11)

 00:00/00:00 x 
IN OTHER NEWS
Sneaker-themed Deadstock
Coffee announces new Old
Town location
Credit: Courtesy of Access Architecture
An early rendering of the proposed Burnside One affordable housing tower along West Burnside Street.
Author: Jonathan Bach (Portland Business Journal)
Published: 5:02 PM PDT August 2, 2023
Updated: 8:09 PM PDT August 2, 2023
PORTLAND, Ore. — A developer is proposing a 30-story affordable housing tower on the
Burnside Bridge's west side.
The developer, Curtis Rystadt, is still in the very early stages, so he doesn't have money
squared away. And he's meeting with the city on Aug. 24 to discuss his plans further.
The tower, as planned, could exceed Old Town's height restrictions. But if Rystadt pulls it off,
Burnside One would become one of Portland's largest affordable housing developments. The
Louisa Flowers in Northeast Portland, with 240 affordable units, stands as the largest city-
funded, single-building affordable housing development of recent decades, according to the
Portland Housing Bureau.
Burnside One, at 108 W. Burnside St., would mark the second project from Rystadt and Access
Architecture's Brendan Sanchez, who began working together on an eight-story affordable
housing development (formerly Glisan Tower, now called TimberView) on Northeast Glisan
Street, which is now under construction.
For Burnside One, Rystadt is proposing 728 units of affordable housing and hopes to break
ground in two years. The building would serve those who earn 60% or less of the area's
median income. The Daily Journal of Commerce first reported on Rystadt's proposal.
Rystadt told the Business Journal downtown Portland desperately needs affordable housing,
but like many real estate professionals, he argued the inclusionary housing policy to make
developers add affordable units into market-rate projects hasn't worked. Economists brought
on by the city to examine the policy counter that, at least in the central city, tax subsidies make
up for the rents that market-rate developers miss out on when they add affordable housing.
What's more, Rystadt envisions a clean-energy building with easy access to MAX. He said a
solar-panel-clad tower could lower residents' energy bills by $80 or $100, freeing them up to
spend money at local businesses. Its proximity to a public transit stop means fewer people in
cars, he said.
The Portland Business Journal, a news partner of KGW, has the full story here.
Related Articles
Demolition prep work for May Apartments could start as soon as this week, city
says
Efforts to clear homeless people from downtown forcing them to relocate to other places,
neighbors say
PPoorrttllaanndd RRiittzz CCaarrllttoonn ggeettss fifinniisshhiinngg ttoouucchheess
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Neuropathy Has Been Linked To a Common Habit. Do You Do It?
Neuropathy is not from Low Vitamin B. Meet the Real Enemy of Neuropathy (Stop Doing This)
Nerve Health|Sponsored Learn More
KGW Top Stories: 6 p.m., Friday January 2, 2025
KGW
BREAKING: Is Illinois in an SEC Battle for THIS Quarterback? | Penn St Preview | Illini
Podcast
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...