Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Nov 3, 2023 at 4:52 pm
Oregon Legislators to Portland Public
Schools: "Take the Reins" and Handle the
Strike
State lawmakers aren't jumping at the opportunity to reallocate state funds
to end the teacher strike.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
Members of PPS unions rally outside the district headquarters. TAYLOR GRIGGS
As Portland Public Schools (PPS) teachers continue their strike for higher
wages, more planning time, and better building conditions, tension is
brewing between the district and Oregon legislators.
Throughout the lengthy bargaining process between PPS and the Portland
Association of Teachers (PAT) union, the district has maintained it can't
afford to accept the union's contract proposal without severe consequences
for Portland schools. With PPS and the union at a stalemate, district leaders
have decided to take a new approach, petitioning state legislators to "find
the money," to fund Portland schools, as PPS Board Chair Gary Hollands
put it at a press conference earlier this week.
Oregon elected officials aren't proving receptive to district leaders' pleas.
Gov. Tina Kotek has already rebuffed the district's requests for funding,
saying more state money for education is off the table until the 2025
legislative session at the soonest. Now, legislators in the Oregon House and
Senate have spoken out. In a letter sent to the PPS board on Thursday,
November 2, 16 Portland-area representatives and senators said they
disagree with the district's framing of how the last legislative session played
out.
"We were surprised to hear accusations that the Oregon Legislature did not
adequately fund schools this past legislative session," the letter stated,
adding legislators "listened to and worked with school districts (including
PPS), educators, labor, and other advocates to fully fund schools at the
amount they requested."
The letter said with the unprecedented $10.3 billion in state funding and
local property taxes, Oregon's K-12 public schools have a budget of $15.3
billion for the current two-year budget cycle—a record number for the
state.
The letter stated PPS spends 48 percent of its budget directly in the
classroom, while "comparable districts" spend 55 to 56 percent, and says
the district spends 6 percent of its budget on administration, compared to 2
to 3 percent elsewhere. Legislators called on the district to "right size its
priorities, refocusing on classroom and student learning investments, and
cutting superfluous administration spending."
Legislators also directed the PPS board leaders to "take the reins of this
situation."
"What our students need now is leadership that shows them you will do
what it takes to invest in their futures, and that starts with coming to the
table now. As educators say, their working conditions are student learning
and living conditions," the letter said. "We all need to work together to
support resolution with a contract that builds the schools our students
deserve."
The letter was signed by legislators including Rep. Travis Nelson (D-44),
Rep. Dacia Grayber (D-28), Sen. Lew Frederick (D-22), Sen. Elizabeth
Steiner (D-17), Senate Majority Leader Kate Lieber (D-14), Senate President
Rob Wagner (D-19), and more. Some of the legislators who signed the letter
have also expressed their support for Portland teachers separately. Steiner
was scheduled to attend a union rally Friday, November 3, and many others
have posted supportive statements on social media.
PPS and the union have said they are willing to negotiate into the weekend.
The district plans to let families know if school is canceled by 7 pm on
Sunday.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS TEACHERS STRIKE EDUCATION LABOR
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
UPDATE: Judge Extends Restraining Order Blocking National Guard Deployment in
Oregon
Portland Police Officer Arrested on Domestic Violence Charges
“There Is No Money”: I-5 Rose Quarter Project Slated for August Groundbreaking,
Budget Woes and All
Legacy Staff and Nurses Union Say Hospital Policies Harm Immigrants
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Editors' Picks
Updated COVID-19 Booster Shots are Available in Oregon—Here’s Where You Can Get
One
Portland Moves a Step Closer to Overhauling Government with a New Voting District
Commission
Let's Eat! The Mercury's BURGER WEEK Is Happening RIGHT NOW! 🎉🍔😍
The Mercury's 48-Hour Drag-A-Thon Live Blog
Popular Music From Parenthetical Girls
Success of Measure 110 Remains in Question, According to State Audit
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS
JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU
SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286