Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Dec 15, 2023 at 4:30 pm
The Portland Clean Energy Fund Is Fast
Becoming the City’s Fiscal Lifeline
New projections show PCEF will have access to about $1.2 billion over the next five years, giving fund
leaders the opportunity to greatly expand its clean energy programming.
TAYLOR GRIGGS
The Portland Clean Energy Fund is flush with cash. The program is fast-becoming a lifeline for other city bureaus. PORTLAND CLEAN ENERGY FUND
Portlanders have seen several iterations of the Portland Clean Energy
Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) since they voted to approve the fund to
kickstart more climate-friendly initiatives in 2018. PCEF— which is funded
by a 1 percent surcharge on local sales at large retailers— has consistently
outperformed expectations, requiring leaders to reevaluate the fund’s
purpose and strategy. Now, an unanticipated surge of cash has prompted
yet another paradigm shift for PCEF.
This week, leaders in Portland’s Bureau of Planning and Sustainability
(BPS), which houses PCEF, announced city budget planners have projected
the clean energy fund will have an additional $540 million to spend on clean
energy projects over the next five years. The money is on top of the $750
million allocated for PCEF’s Climate Investment Plan, which Portland City
Council adopted earlier this year.
That’s right: Portland’s clean energy fund is set to rake in more than $1.2
billion from now until 2028, and PCEF leaders already have a plan about
how they want to spend it. If the PCEF committee and City Council approve
the plan early next year, about half of the newly-projected funds will go to
cash-strapped city bureaus for work addressing climate change. The other
half is designated for street tree maintenance, green affordable housing,
climate-friendly infrastructure at the fire bureau, and more.
The influx of money is notable not only because it shows Portlanders really
like to shop— healthy sales at large retailers like grocery stores have kept
PCEF (very) well-funded. During a time when several crucial city bureaus
are staring down significant budget shortfalls, and looking at layoffs and
program cuts, PCEF’s success is an anomaly. With its latest spending plan,
the fund is doing something new: Offering a lifeline to these struggling
bureaus, so long as they’re engaging in projects that contribute to PCEF’s
overall decarbonization mission.
Responding to New Needs
Upon its initial implementation, PCEF’s programming was mostly
dedicated to doling out grants to local nonprofit organizations, who would
carry out the fund’s mission through community projects. While providing
nonprofit grant funding is still a significant component of PCEF operations,
the program has honed in on its goals through its new Climate Investment
Plan, which provides a more targeted framework for how funds should be
spent. PCEF is also now able to partner with private organizations and
government agencies.
The PCEF code changes City Council adopted in 2022 were partially
instigated by a bruising audit of the program, which found PCEF had
difficulty effectively allocating all the money it was raking in. But the fund’s
evolution was also spurred by a new understanding of what’s needed to
curb local carbon emissions.
One good example of this shift is how PCEF has addressed transportation-
related carbon emissions. The transportation sector is the largest
contributor to local and statewide greenhouse gas emissions, but went
largely ignored in PCEF’s first and second grant allocation cycles. Now,
PCEF’s Climate Investment Plan allocates a significant portion of funding
to transportation decarbonization, including by funding programs like
electric bike incentives.
Fund leaders have decided to use the additional $540 million PCEF will
have access to over the next five years to respond to a citywide budget crisis
impacting several bureaus. PCEF leaders initially said they didn’t want to
designate funds to backfill existing programs: Its $750 million Climate
Investment Plan is intended to expand the city’s capacity to address climate
change and specifically targets low-income Portland residents and people
of color, who are most likely to experience the worst effects of the climate
crisis. However, with city departments like the Portland Bureau of
Transportation (PBOT) on the verge of cutting some of its own emissions-
reductions programs, it was no longer tenable for PCEF to sit on the
sidelines.
At a September City Council meeting discussing PCEF’s Climate
Investment Plan, Commissioner Rene Gonzalez raised concerns about
whether or not the fund “put sufficient resources toward transportation
decarbonization,” considering PBOT’s “impending funding crisis.” It looks
like Gonzalez’s words were effective.
PCEF’s new spending plan allocates $282 million to six city bureaus: PBOT,
the Bureau of Environmental Services (BES), the Portland Housing Bureau
(PHB), the Office of Management and Finance, Portland Parks & Recreation
(PP&R), and the water bureau. The remaining $258 million is dedicated to
other projects, such as green affordable housing production and right-of-
way street tree maintenance, both of which will receive a $100 million cash
infusion.
For PBOT, the funds couldn’t come at a more dire time. The transportation
bureau has long been under-resourced and struggled with a growing
maintenance backlog, and their financial outlook took an unexpected hit
this spring, when Portland City Council voted to cut a parking fee increase
PBOT had been counting on. Bureau leaders have been staring at $32
million in budget cuts in the next fiscal year, which would require laying off
dozens of staffers and eliminating integral programs.
Under the new PCEF spending plan, however, PBOT would receive $112
million over the next five years: Not enough to completely solve their
money woes, but a much-needed lifeline. The funds would be split into a
one-time $30 million allocation and $16.4 million annually until 2028. If
approved, the money will go toward bike lane maintenance, active
transportation capital projects, community programming, new, energy-
efficient LED streetlights, and replacing the Portland Streetcar fleet.
“We are appreciative of the $112 million investment in transportation from
PCEF. With over 40% of Portland’s carbon emissions coming directly from
transportation, we have significant work to do to meet our climate goals,”
PBOT Communications Director Hannah Schafer said in a statement to the
Mercury. “This funding will help PBOT fulfill a key priority of our bureau, the
city, and PCEF: making low-carbon travel options safe, accessible, and
convenient for all Portlanders.”
Schafer said PBOT is “currently assessing how this will impact our overall
budget shortfall.”
“We anticipate this funding will help us keep some jobs and programs that
otherwise would have been cut,” she said.
PCEF’s emphasis on green housing development is in response to Portland’s
housing affordability crisis, and the benefits that dense, multifamily
housing projects can have for reducing a city’s carbon footprint.
At a press conference on December 13, Rubio and BPS Director Donnie
Oliveira faced pushback about the focus on housing development, with one
reporter suggesting voters didn’t approve PCEF in 2018 because they
wanted the funds to support housing.
“We’re not just investing in things because we think they’re cool,” Oliveira
said. “They actually have to demonstrate greenhouse gas reductions or
sequestration, they have to show a community benefit. All the goals and
requirements of the fund will still be applied to the housing projects that
are funded.”
Oliveira said housing developments built with PCEF funds will contain
energy-efficient heating and cooling systems like the ones the program is
installing in existing buildings. If the developments are prioritized for
transit-dense, walkable communities, the city will see an additional climate
benefit through reduced single passenger vehicle usage.
What’s next for PCEF?
In addition to the new spending plan, PCEF launched its third request for
grant proposals at the end of November. The fund will allocate between $40
and $60 million in grants to qualified nonprofit organizations, specifically
focused on energy efficiency and renewable energy, transportation
decarbonization, regenerative agriculture, green infrastructure, and
workforce and contractor development. The grant application will close on
February 1.
The PCEF committee will need to approve the new spending plan before it
goes to City Council early next year. It’s unclear at this point if any members
of the committee will want to make changes to the plan. In a PCEF press
release, committee co-chair Ranfis Villatoro expressed optimism about the
new plan, saying it is “yet another opportunity to go even further while
continuing to remain aligned with program goals.”
You can read more about the spending plan for the additional $540 million
here.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS ENVIRONMENT TRANSPORTATION
Taylor Griggs
Taylor Griggs is a news reporter for the Portland Mercury. Email her at
tgriggs@portlandmercury.com.
✉  
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
With a Tenuous Ceasefire in Gaza, Portland Councilors Pledge to Investigate the City's
Links to Israel
Introducing the Portland Mercury’s Newest Reporter, Jeremiah Hayden!
Despite State Transportation Funding Crisis, Construction Begins on I-5 Rose Quarter
Project
The 'Big Beautiful Bill' is Gutting Oregon’s SNAP Benefits
Body Camera Footage Shows Damon Lamarr Johnson Died While Restrained By Police
Oregon to Feds: Rein in Your Officers or We'll Prosecute
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Old Politicians, Young Pop Stars, #MeToo Aftershocks, and
Solidarity Forever
Say Nice Things About Portland… Again!
Hey Sexy! Take the Mercury's 2025 SEX SURVEY!
Mercury Endorsements: District 4 Candidates
Advocates Fear Increased Pedestrian Deaths in Planned Rose Quarter Project
Weather is Trash, Mark Wahlberg has an App for That, Millennials are Old, and Keiko's
Legacy
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286