Try 1-on-1 Language Learning
AmazingTalker connects you with top language tutors
from around the world!
AmazingTalker Visit Site
SCIENCE
1st small modular nuclear reactor
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss -
Only $119/Month
certified for use in US
FuturHealth Learn Mo
The U.S. Energy Department said the newly approved design “equips
the nation with a new clean power source to help drive down"
greenhouse gas emissions.
AAdd 11 ooff 11

Why Is Everyone Quitting Gmail?
sponsored by: Proton Mail
 00:00/00:00 x 
IN OTHER NEWS
OHSU study finds exposure
pollution changes kid's bra
development
Credit: Thinkstock
Nuclear power plant.
Author: Jennifer McDermott (Associated Press)
Published: 9:38 PM PST January 20, 2023
Updated: 9:38 PM PST January 20, 2023
TIGARD, Ore. — The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has certified the design for what will
be the United States' first small modular nuclear reactor.
The rule that certifies the design was published Thursday in the Federal Register. It means that
companies seeking to build and operate a nuclear power plant can pick the design for a 50-
megawatt, advanced light-water small modular nuclear reactor by Oregon-based NuScale
Power and apply to the NRC for a license.
It's the final determination that the design is acceptable for use, so it can't be legally challenged
during the licensing process when someone applies to build and operate a nuclear power
plant, NRC spokesperson Scott Burnell said Friday. The rule becomes effective in late February.
The U.S. Energy Department said the newly approved design “equips the nation with a new
clean power source to help drive down" planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions.
It's the seventh nuclear reactor design cleared for use in the United States. The rest are for
traditional, large, light-water reactors.
Credit: NuScale
Diane Hughes, NuScale's vice president of marketing and communications, said the design
certification is a historic step forward toward a clean energy future and makes the company's
VOYGR power plant a near-term deployable solution for customers. The first small modular
reactor design application package included over 2 million pages of supporting materials,
Hughes added.
$50.00
However, David Schlissel at the Ohio-based Institute for Energy Economics and Financial
Analysis expressed concerns about the costs. Schlissel, who has studied the history of the
nuclear power industry and the finances of the NuScale project, expects they will continue to
go up, which could limit how many NuScale reactors are built. He said he thinks they're not
competitive in price with renewables and battery storage.
Hughes said from wind and solar to hydrogen and nuclear, energy projects have seen cost
increases due to changing financial market dynamics, interest rate hikes and inflationary
pressures on the sector's supply chain that have not been seen in decades. NuScale’s VOYGR
power plant remains a cost competitive source of reliable, affordable and carbon-free energy,
she added.
For many, nuclear power is emerging as an answer as states and countries transition away from
coal, oil and natural gas to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and stave off the worst effects of
a warming planet.
Roughly 40 serious concepts are in development for the next generation of advanced nuclear
reactors worldwide. China was the first to connect a next-generation reactor to its grid to
produce about 200 megawatts of electricity. A high-temperature, gas-cooled reactor began
operating in 2021.
The U.S. Energy Department said it provided more than $600 million since 2014 to support the
design, licensing and siting of NuScale’s VOYGR small modular reactor power plant and other
domestic small reactor concepts. The department is working with Utah Associated Municipal
Power Systems to demonstrate a six-module NuScale VOYGR plant at the Idaho National
Laboratory. The first module is expected to be operational by 2029.
NuScale has signed 19 agreements in the U.S. and internationally to deploy its small reactor
technology. Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy Kathryn Huff said small modular reactors
are no longer an abstract concept.
“They are real and they are ready for deployment thanks to the hard work of NuScale, the
university community, our national labs, industry partners, and the NRC,” Huff said in a
statement. "This is innovation at its finest and we are just getting started here in the U.S.”
NuScale has also applied to the NRC for approval of a larger design, at 77 megawatts per
module, and the agency is checking the application for completeness before starting a full
review, Burnell said.
Related Articles
The federal government can't dispose of some nuclear waste. It could lead to a
disaster.
Fusion breakthrough could be climate, energy game-changer
EEnneerrggyy--eeffifficciieenntt hhoommee iimmpprroovveemmeenntt ooppttiioonnss ccoommee wwiitthh nneeww iinncceennttiivveess
Copyright 2025 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
더 알고 싶으신가요? 여기를 클릭하세요
seniorlivingnearme.com|Sponsored
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Nutritionists Explains: Gelatin Is the Easiest Way to Lose Weight Fast
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
Microdose: A new, affordable way to start GLP-1s
Noom’s Microdose GLP-1Rx program starts at just $99
Noom|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
Man accused of trying to kidnap baby from stroller at Walmart in Cornelius
KGW
Mt. Hood Meadows suspends operations Friday and Saturday
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...