Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
May 29, 2019 at 12:56 pm
Oregon’s Weed Inspection and Tracking
Systems Are Improving
BLAIR STENVICK
DAN_COLE.jpg
DAN COLE
Oregon’s recreational cannabis inspections and tracking systems are more
consistent and secure than they were this time last year, according to a
report released Wednesday by Oregon Secretary of State Bev Clarno’s office.
The report was a follow-up to an audit released in February of 2018, which
found gaping holes in the Oregon Liquor Control Commission’s (OLCC)
cannabis tracking systems. That audit also concluded that the OLCC
needed more trained on-site inspectors for retailers and growers, and that
the agency’s self-reporting system for cannabis businesses could result in
glaring inaccuracies in state data.
According to the follow-up report, the OLCC has taken “substantial steps”
to fix those problems. Of 17 different issues found by the Secretary of State’s
office, 10 had been solved, five had been at least partially fixed, and two had
not yet been addressed.
Among the improvements made: The OLCC now has more consistent
standards for on-site inspections, and has requested additional funding so
it can add more inspectors to its ranks. The report notes that between April
of 2018 and April of 2019, the OLCC had inspected 406 recreational pot
growers and 72 retailers. (For context, the OLCC has issued over 2,000
cannabis business licenses since recreational pot became legal in 2015.)
The OLCC has also refined the process for businesses self-reporting their
inventory and sales through the state’s Cannabis Tracking System, and has
begun monitoring businesses suspected of foul play. However, the report
notes this monitoring is “performed on an ad hoc basis” that is “not fully
documented or standardized.”
Meanwhile, the OLCC has made changes to bring its technology and
computer security systems up to date, and limit the number of people who
have access to its data. Several additional security upgrades are currently in
the works.
There are two security recommendations from the February 2018 audit that
the OLCC has yet to follow up on, but the agency plans to do so in the
future.
It’s important to note that the February 2018 audit focused solely on the
OLCC’s tracking and inspection protocol for the recreational cannabis
industry. A wider-reaching audit released earlier this year found additional
problems with the state’s overwhelming surplus of cannabis, the OLCC’s
licensing processes, and the Oregon Health Authority’s oversight of medical
cannabis growth and sales. A follow-up to that audit has yet to be released.
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 1     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Blair Stenvick
Blair Stenvick is a former news reporter and culture writer for the Portland Mercury.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Supporters Pack Courtroom for Portlander Facing Federal Protest Charges
Portland Students Walk Out of Class to Protest ICE Activity
Mayor Wilson Nominates New City Administrator
City Council Mulling $4.3 Million Cut From Homeless Sweeps Budget
Updated: County Declares Emergency as Portland Faces Dangerous, Extended Heat Wave
Portland Responds to SNAP Shutdown Delays and Funding Cuts: Resources to Use and
Support
Editors' Picks
It Took a Village (of Portland Animators) to Raise Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio
The Mike Pence Raid, The Mitt Romney Scold, The Ashton Kutcher Charmlessness
Defense, and Cocaine Dolphins (I Wish)
Hey Lovebirds! Submit Your FREE Mercury Reader Valentines... NOW!
THE TRASH REPORT: Beetlejuicin' Boebert, Pappin' Pitt, and Misogyny in General
Monkey Business, Monica Lewinsky, Protein Thefts, and Being Cool and Slutty
POP QUIZ PDX: Terrible Politicians, Local Celebs in the Movies, and Which "Career
Barbie" are YOU?
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286