Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Dec 19, 2019 at 4:00 am
When Will The Police Bureau Be Held
Accountable for Killing People With a Mental
Illness?
ALEX ZIELINSKI
ZAGER, RAPID EYE / GETTY IMAGES
T
wenty people with a mental illness have been killed by the Portland
Police Bureau (PPB) in the past decade.
The first, Aaron Campbell, was depressed and contemplating thoughts of
suicide when he was shot in the back by an officer outside his apartment
complex. The latest, Koben Henriksen, was homeless with an untreated
mental illness when he was gunned down by police near Mall 205.
It was this same decade that the US Department of Justice sued the City of
Portland for having a police department that disproportionately used
deadly force against people experiencing a mental health crisis. Since that
2012 lawsuit, Portland has been operating under the terms of a settlement
agreement with the feds—one that, through new training and increased
police discipline, is meant to prevent similar fatal encounters.
Yet none of the officers responsible for those 20 deaths have faced criminal
charges for their actions.
And out of the dozens of officers involved in these fatal shootings, only one
has faced any kind of discipline from PPB: Officer Ron Frashour was fired
after shooting Campbell in 2010.
He was rehired by PPB five years later.
The lack of accountability among these officers, many of whom are still
active and armed members of the PPB, is stunning. But the way their
superiors have shrugged responsibility is almost worse.
In a press statement issued four days after Henriksen’s December 8 death,
PPB Chief Danielle Outlaw blamed the local mental health system for the
police shooting.
“There are a number of accountability measures in effect for the officers
involved, which will scrutinize their every action and decision,” said Outlaw.
“Where is the same level of accountability throughout the mental health
system? Law enforcement professionals are put in an impossible position,
and we need the public to help prioritize effective and humane mental
health treatment and demand urgent and immediate action.”
A day later, Mayor Ted Wheeler parroted his police chief’s criticism.
“I feel quite strongly that the mental health system failed Mr. Henriksen,”
Wheeler told reporters at a press conference.
Wheeler, who serves as the city’s police commissioner, somberly pledged to
work harder to connect “vulnerable” Portlanders to the local mental health
system, which is run by Multnomah County. He made no mention of
addressing the growing number of vulnerable Portlanders who have died at
the hands of his police force.
This year, Portland saw the highest number of fatal shootings of people in a
mental health crisis since 2010. The four victims—Henriksen, Lane Martin,
David Downs, and Andre Gladen—were all in need of critical mental health
treatment the day they were killed. In the years and months leading up to
their deaths, some of them had voluntarily sought help from Oregon’s
notoriously under-resourced behavioral health care system, while others
had to be forcibly committed to mental health treatment.
The state and county mental health system has, at times, proven to have
fatal gaps. But, as Sarah Radcliffe, an attorney with Disability Rights Oregon
tells me, “Even with a robust mental health system in place, there are still
going to be moments of crisis that require a police officer response.
“And it’s absolutely unacceptable to respond with deadly force,” says
Radcliffe.
Multnomah County spokesperson Julie Sullivan-Springhetti shared this
stance in an emailed response to the city’s insinuations. “Ultimately, anyone
experiencing a mental health crisis should not have to face a violent death
at the hands of law enforcement,” wrote Sullivan-Springhetti.
Our community isn’t safe when our police force believes they can kill
someone with a mental illness without consequences. Until Portland police
officers are held accountable for killing those in crisis year after year, city
leaders are in no position to point fingers.
In her statement, Outlaw called on the public to “demand urgent and
immediate action.” It’s up to you, Portland, to decide who to demand it
from.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS OPINION
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Portlanders Say "Yes" to Parks Levy in Early Special Election Results
Legacy Health Staff Say They’ll Stay on Strike Until Company Offers Better Deal
Trump Stymied Again; Appeals Court Will Rehear Oregon’s National Guard Deployment
Case
Mercury Endorsement: Vote Yes on the Portland Parks Levy
Palestine Supporters Walk Out of Regina Spektor’s Portland Show
Amid Grim Outlook for National Climate Investments, Portland’s Clean Energy Fund
Doles Out Nearly $64 Million
Editors' Picks
Good Morning, News: City Admin Raked Over Coals, Kendrick Dances on Drake's Grave,
and Donald Trump's Firehose of Failure
Portland City Council Stops Transparency Advocate Proposal from Going to Voters In
May
The Biggest Portland Labor News of 2023
The Mercury 2024 Sex Survey Results!
POP QUIZ PDX: How Much Do YOU Know About Portland? And Oregon? And Ferris
Bueller?
THE TRASH REPORT: Shutdown Averted, Living and Dying Icons, and How Elinor Jones
Learned About Sports
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286