Independent. Member-supported. Independent.
donate now
For the Pacific Northwest. Member-supported.
About OPB Public media funding OPB and KMHD events OPB en Español Partnerships Newsletters
SCIENCE ENVIRONMENT
Portland, State Of Oregon Team Up To Pay
For Willamette River Superfund Cleaning
By OPB Staff (OPB)
Portland, Ore. May 10, 2019 12:47 p.m.
The city of Portland and the state of Oregon say they’re partnering to tackle the
Portland Harbor cleanup efforts.
Last December, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that the
entire Portland Harbor site must meet certain goals toward figuring out a cleanup plan
by the end of 2019.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
The cleanup site spans about 10 miles of the Willamette River starting around Sauvie
Island, extending just north of the Broadway Bridge.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
The Sam Sanders Show
Under the new partnership proposal, the city and state will each contribute up to $12
million to a fund that will be used to encourage the groups and companies responsible
for cleaning the river to create their own cleanup designs.
"I think something like this is good because it demonstrates leadership by the city and
the state of Oregon," said Travis Williams, executive director of the environmental
advocacy group Willamette Riverkeeper. "And it’s also the kind of leadership that will
hopefully incentivize others in this process to complete their agreements with the EPA
and to begin design work to clean up some of this site down at Portland Harbor."
Pollution in the area has been deemed the responsibility of more than 100 different
entities including the Port of Portland, Union Pacific Railroad Co. and Chevron USA.
After designs are finalized, the actual cleanup work is expected to cost about $1 billion
and take approximately 13 years, according to the EPA.
"Our waters and our lands are some of our most precious resources, and this project will
help ensure that they will be enjoyed by generations to come,” Gov. Kate Brown said in a
news release. “It’s a great example of how working together brings forward cost-effective
solutions.”
The partnership proposal goes to the Portland City Council next week.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
The Sam Sanders Show
📨
Daily news in your
inbox
example@domain.com Sign up
Sign up today for OPB’s “First Look” – your
daily guide to the most important news
and culture stories from around the
Northwest.
Tags: Science & Environment, Environment, Local, News, Politics, Water
Federal funding for public media has been eliminated.
Take action now and protect OPB's independent
journalism and essential programs for everyone.
Make a Sustaining contribution now

About OPB Manage My Membership
Help Center Sponsorship
Work With Us Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
STREAMING NOW
FCC Public Files
The Sam Sanders Show
FCC Applications
Terms of Use
Editorial Policy
SMS T&C
Contest Rules
Accessibility
STREAMING NOW
The Sam Sanders Show