Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Sep 4, 2019 at 1:04 pm
Proposed 2020 Ballot Measure Could Limit Self-
Checkout Machines
BLAIR STENVICK
Fertnig.jpg
FERTNIG / GETTY IMAGES
In the penultimate episode of Years and Years, a dark futuristic HBO
miniseries that's like Black Mirror only better, a British family matriarch
delivers a lecture to her grandchildren about the myriad ways everyday
people are complicit in society's ills. To illustrate her point, she references
grocery store self-checkout machines.
"I saw it all going wrong when it began, in the supermarkets, when they
replaced the women on the till with those automatic checkouts," she said.
Her offspring protest—they all hate those machines, they say—but she
doesn't buy it.
"Yes, but you didn't do anything, did you?" she asks. "Now all those women
are gone, and we let it happen. Because we can stroll through, do our
shopping, and don't have to look that woman in the eye."
The authors of one voter initiative headed toward the Oregon 2020 ballot
would likely agree with that sentiment. Titled the "Grocery Store Service
and Community Protection Act," the union-backed measure would limit all
Oregon grocers to operating just two self-checkout machines per store at
any given time.
The Oregon AFL-CIO, which sponsors the measure, announced Wednesday
that has 1,500 signatures, more than enough to begin the process of putting
it on the ballot. The organization argues that the measure is necessary to
protect both workers and customers at Oregon grocery stores.
Grocery stores use self-checkout machines because they save money and
are thought to be more efficient; according to one study, it requires just one
employee to oversee four self-check out machines. But with those cost
savings come an increased pressure on Oregon grocery store employees,
many of whom already make wages low enough to quality for food stamps.
(In Oregon, a single person qualifies for food stamps if they make $16,000 a
year or less.)
"Self-service checkouts allow grocery stores to rely more heavily on part-
time employees, positions which do not provide retail workers with a living
wage or access to benefits," reads the ballot measure. "Because people of
color are overrepresented in cashier position, which is the lowest paid
position in retail businesses, the increasing use of self-service checkouts has
a disproportionate negative impact on people of color."
Beyond the threat self-checkout machines pose for grocery store
employees, they also can be difficult for some shoppers to navigate,
especially those who are elderly or have disabilities. That's also addressed in
the ballot measure.
"The increasing use of self-service checkouts—where the customer does not
interact with a human— contributes to social isolation and related negative
health consequences," it reads. "Elderly costumers and customers with
disabilities often lack the confidence or ability to use self-service
checkouts."
It doesn't appear that Oregon's major grocery store chains have weighed in
on this ballot measure yet, though that group has flexed its political muscle
in other recent campaigns. But the Freedom Foundation, a West Coast
conservative non-profit and think tank, was critical of the measure in a
recent blog post:
"If successful, the so-called 'Grocery Store Service and Community
Protection Act' would force retailers across Oregon to downsize their
self-service checkout areas to no more than two kiosks per store.
Self-checkout kiosks often help cut back on time spent in a grocery
store for those not getting many items. This leads to shorter lines and
streamlines the process of customers paying for their groceries.
...[T]he main push for this government regulation on the private sector
is undoubtedly the union’s insatiable desire to collect dues. Several
popular grocery store chains in Oregon are unionized and restricting
self-checkout would create an increase in union-represented cashiers."
If this measure makes it onto the ballot, Oregonians will be able to vote on
the issue in November 2020.
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 2     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Blair Stenvick
Blair Stenvick is a former news reporter and culture writer for the Portland Mercury.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Drive-Thru Debacle Threatens to Keep Historic Dairy Queen in a Deep Freeze
Portland's Emergency World Naked Bike Ride Location Released
Photo Essay: Tens of Thousands March in Portland’s No Kings Demonstration
“Not a Rubber Stamp”: Portland City Council Questions Settlement in Bike Bill Lawsuit
Recent In-Custody Death Reignites Calls For a Police-Free Crisis Response System
Daytime Cooling Centers Reopen In Portland Tuesday Amid Extreme Heat Wave
Editors' Picks
THE TRASH REPORT: Spotify Thinks I'm Basic but Gay, Paris Isn't Just a DJ, and George
Santos is Laughing All the Way to Unlimited OnlyFans
THE TRASH REPORT: Alligator Alcatraz Was a Good Idea for a Dumb Movie (But a Bad
Idea for Reality), and Other Truths
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About Old-Timey Statues, Parades, and (Whoopsy...)
PORTLAND IS SINKING!
Eating Alone on Lunar New Year
Sassy-Ass Trivia About Shadow Mayors, Local Comic Book Shops, and the Funnest Bar In
Town!
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Ass Trivia About Striking Teachers, Gorgeous Bats, and Wheeler's
Glorified Mall Cops
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286