Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 3, 2019 at 4:00 am
Portland’s Biggest (and Weirdest) News Stories
of 2018
ALEX ZIELINSKI & BLAIR STENVICK
MERCURY STAFF
If you’re reading this, it’s 2019.
You’ve already poured out the leftover glasses of flat champagne, scribbled
some resolutions on a Post-it note that you will promptly lose, and proudly
declared that this year won’t be like the last. We hear you.
But! Before you blindly embrace a blank calendar year like it’s your first date
with an alluring stranger, it’s our job to remind you that 2019 comes with a
whole lot of baggage from 2018. Sure, some of it is best forgotten (Knute
Buehler’s goatee), but a lot of what went down in 2018 will inform this year’s
crucial decisions, conversations, and questions. Like: Who is Jo Ann
Hardesty? Are we still boycotting Burgerville? Did we make Patriot Prayer
go away for good yet? And what happened to those dorky e-scooters?
So here’s a look back at 2018’s biggest (and weirdest) news stories—and
some reminders of how they’ll influence Portland in the year to come.
Portland’s Eight Biggest News Stories
Police Shootings
It’s been six years since the US Department of Justice ordered Portland’s
police officers to reduce the number of violent interactions they have with
people with a mental illness and people of color. But, when considering the
four people who died at the hands of Portland law enforcement in 2018, it’s
hard to see an improvement. Two of the men who died last year, Jason
Washington and Patrick Kimmons, were Black. The other two, John Elifritz
and Samuel Rice, were fatally shot while in the midst of a behavioral health
crisis. What’s more, every officer involved in these shootings—officers
representing the City of Portland, Multnomah County, and Portland State
University—were cleared of criminal charges, sparking outrage,
disappointment, and disillusionment with criminal justice reform from
family members, friends, community members, and advocates for police
accountability.
Renter Relocation Fees Made Permanent
The year started off with a victory for renters’ rights, with Portland city
council finalizing Commissioner Chloe Eudaly’s long-negotiated renter
relocation policy, which requires that landlords cover moving costs for
particularly vulnerable tenants. The policy kicks in when a landlord either
issues a no-cause eviction or forces a tenant to move with rent increases of
10 percent or more within a year. Tenant rights’ activists say the measure
has already decreased the number of no-cause evictions in Portland—but
the new protections aren’t without problems. Shortly after the relocation
ordinance was approved, an apartment complex in Southeast Portland
announced it would be changing ownership and evicting all of its residents
in the process. The landlord offered more than the city-required relocation
funds to all tenants—but in Portland’s housing market, this still wasn’t
enough to help longtime tenants find new homes. This is one of many
wrinkles in the city’s renter protection system that still needs some work.
Burgerville Employees Unionize. Burgerville Fights Back.
Fed-up Burgerville employees made history this year by successfully
organizing the country’s first federally-recognized fast food union. The
Burgerville Workers Union (BVWU) began at the local chain’s Southeast
92nd and Powell store and has since expanded to the Gladstone and
Southeast Hawthorne locations. But the company’s management hasn’t
made it easy for the burgeoning union to negotiate their first contract,
which asks for a higher hourly wage and health insurance for part-time
employees. Burgerville has also leaned on coercive, anti-union messaging in
an attempt to keep the BVWU from expanding to more stores across the
Pacific Northwest. Unfortunately for the fast food darling, BVWU not only
has the backing of numerous Portland officials (including Mayor Ted
Wheeler), but has also convinced many Burgerville fans to boycott the
unquestionably delicious restaurant until the union contract is finalized.
TriMet Flip-Flops on Fares
In July, TriMet enacted a new policy that would give anyone cited for not
paying bus or MAX fares 90 days to resolve that citation outside of the court
system. This move, paired with a new low-income fare program, suggested
the regional transit agency was softening to pro-rider policies. That win for
transit advocates, however, was tripped up by an older fare-related case
that’s still stuck in the courts. In March, Ana del Rocío was arrested for not
giving her legal name to a police officer who had asked to see her MAX
ticket. But since del Rocío was stopped in one of TriMet’s mass fare
inspections—and not an incident where an officer had probable cause to
detain her—the case was dropped by a Multnomah County judge. In doing
so, the judge noted that TriMet’s technique of inspecting MAX fares
violated both the Oregon and US constitutions. While TriMet has argued
that they did nothing wrong, Oregon Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum
refused to appeal the county court’s ruling, leaving TriMet vulnerable to
future fare-related lawsuits.
Minorities Sweep Local Elections
This was the year that Portlanders finally elected a Black woman—Jo Ann
Hardesty—to the city council. Hardesty won in a November runoff against
another Black woman, Multnomah County Commissioner Loretta Smith.
But the diversity in Oregon’s election cycle didn’t stop there: In Senate
District 24, which includes the area between 82nd and Gresham and
stretches out to Happy Valley, voters replaced incumbent male landlord
Senator Rod Monroe with tenant lawyer Shemia Fagan; North Portlanders
elected Susheela Jayapal to the Multnomah County Board of
Commissioners, making her the first South Asian American to serve in
public office in the state; and Lynn Peterson replaced outgoing Metro
President Tom Hughes. Voters were clear: In Multnomah County, at least,
the future is female.
Mayor Wheeler Tries (and Fails) to Fix Protests
It’s not a real Portland summer without a few violent clashes between right-
wing militia group Patriot Prayer and lefty anti-fascist (Antifa) groups.
Patriot Prayer, based in Vancouver, Washington, visited Portland a handful
of times with no real purpose—except for taunting liberals and waving
Confederate flags. Only after business owners complained that the protests
were impacting commerce did Mayor Ted Wheeler put together a flimsy
attempt to control future violent protests. His proposed ordinance—which
would have allowed him to limit the time, location, and size of a protest—
failed to pass the ACLU’s constitutionality test. It also didn’t survive a city
council vote, leaving the city with few new ideas to handle whatever
garbage Patriot Prayer intends on spewing on Portland in the new year.
Portland Occupies ICE, Wheeler Pays the Price
News that the Trump Administration was enacting a new “zero tolerance”
border policy—one that includes separating immigrant children from their
families and holding them in detention centers—roiled the nation in June.
Locally, activists protested and camped out in front of a US Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) facility at the South Waterfront for weeks,
until they were cleared by federal law enforcement officials. During the
protests, Mayor Ted Wheeler said he wouldn’t be directing Portland Police
Bureau (PPB) resources to assist ICE, saying he’d leave the job to the federal
government. While PPB was still allowed to respond to 911 calls from the
ICE facility, Wheeler’s stance didn’t sit well with the union representing ICE
employees, the National ICE Council. In October, the union announced it
was calling for a criminal investigation into Wheeler’s decisions during the
protests, claiming the mayor used his “police powers to harm those he
believes possess alternative political beliefs.” Wheeler issued a sharp
response, saying ICE was “coming after me because I am a vocal opponent
of the administration’s policy of separating kids from their parents.” The
union still intends on suing the city.
Immigrants Unlawfully Held in an Oregon Prison
The Trump administration’s draconian decision to arrest any immigrant
requesting asylum in the US had an unexpected and unprecedented impact
on Oregon’s prison system. That’s because 120 immigrant men seeking
protection in the US were swooped up at the US-Mexico border and
plopped in a rural prison in Sheridan, Oregon, some 50 miles southwest of
Portland. The men represented 16 countries and spoke 13 languages. The
prison staff, who were given less than a week’s notice before the new
inmates arrived, had little (if any) information on what rights federal
immigrant detainees are allowed—meaning that for months, all of the
immigrants were denied constitutionally mandated legal aid, translation
services, phone access, and health care. After an intervention by the ACLU,
a federal court ordered the prison to allow immigration lawyers inside—
resulting in the eventual release of almost every incarcerated immigrant.
Portland’s Five Weirdest News Stories
People Still Really Wanted to Turn a Prison into a Homeless Shelter
A once-rejected idea to turn an abandoned prison into a homeless facility
was resurrected in 2018 and, surprising no one, was again rejected. The
charge was led by two candidates for Oregon public office—Multnomah
County Commissioner Loretta Smith, a failed candidate for Portland City
Council, and Knute Buehler, a failed gubernatorial candidate—and backed
by neighborhood associations with notoriously anti-homeless stances.
Actual homeless people and longtime homeless advocates, however,
opposed the idea of shuttling houseless Portlanders to an isolated
detention center 12 miles outside of downtown Portland. Most Multnomah
County Commissioners agreed and voted to sell the county facility to a
private developer. The verdict’s still out on what the desolate property will
turn into.
City Hall Communications Got... Strange
Mayor Ted Wheeler’s media and communications guidelines got an
unexpected overhaul this year—a few times! First, the mayor’s office
announced it would be holding monthly press conferences and would turn
an unused room in City Hall into a reporter work space. Cool! Then,
Wheeler hired a new communications director, former KOIN reporter
Eileen Park. Suddenly, Wheeler had a new social media persona—one that
“called out” ACLU lawyers, provoked right-wing rabble rousers, and boasted
about past victories. Portland’s Twitterverse cringed. Not long after, Park’s
plans to invite hand-picked reporters to watch a protest from inside the
police bureau’s command center—and asking said reporters to sign a non-
disclosure agreement beforehand—were made public. Double cringe.
A Horse Tried to Sue Its Abusive Owner
This year, a national animal rights organization attempted to turn an
Oregon horse named Justice into a celebrity. The Animal Legal Defense
Fund (ALDF) argued in a Washington County courtroom that Justice
should be able to sue his former owner for personal injury, since his past
owner’s neglect had left the horse with serious life-altering health issues
that his new owner couldn’t afford. This would have made Justice the first
animal to be given the legal autonomy to sue a human. Despite hearing a
well-polished argument, Judge John Knowles rejected the case, on the
grounds that a “non-human animal... lacks the legal status or qualifications
necessary for the assertion of legal rights and duties in a court of law.” But
Justice’s fight isn’t over yet. ALDF plans to appeal Knowles’ decision to the
Oregon Court of Appeals.
A Louisiana Senator (and Trump) Called for Mayor Wheeler’s Resignation
Louisiana Senator Bill Cassidy was probably just looking to score points
with his conservative base when he called on Mayor Ted Wheeler to resign.
Cassidy butted into Portland politics back in August, a few months after
Wheeler said he wouldn’t be directing Portland Police Bureau (PPB)
resources toward assisting officers at the ICE protest, which Cassidy took to
mean Wheeler was “banning” police from helping ICE. That wasn’t quite
true—PPB still responded to calls for help when they received them—but it
registered high enough on the conservative outrage scale for Cassidy to
introduce a resolution calling for Wheeler to resign.
Cassidy’s resolution came just a day after Donald Trump called out Wheeler
in a speech at the White House. In October, Fox News’ deranged opinion
roundtable The Five went after Wheeler in an eight-minute-long segment,
castigating the mayor for supposedly enabling Antifa.
E-scooters Happened
E-scooters invaded Portland streets with all the force of a middle school fad
—and disappeared just as quickly. Back in July, the Portland Bureau of
Transportation (PBOT) launched an e-scooter pilot program, and what
followed were 120 heady days of e-scooting madness, particularly around
the city center. But according to a PBOT survey, the program—featuring
scootin’ machines from very cool single-word companies Bird, Lime, and
Skip—didn’t do much to serve the city’s wider transportation needs. As
expected, most e-scooter riders never used them to access public
transportation, and the majority of users lived in Portland’s richest
neighborhoods. Oh, and apparently people were throwing their e-scooters
into the Willamette River after they were done with them? PBOT is
expected to release more of its findings from the pilot project in early 2019,
which will help determine whether Portlanders get to e-scoot another day.
Five News Stories to Keep Following
Where’s That Navigation Center?
In April, city and county officials called a press conference to announce the
construction of a homeless shelter on the edge of Portland’s Pearl District.
Officials seemed especially excited because it was going to be entirely
bankrolled by private benefactors—notably, Columbia Sportswear CEO Tim
Boyle and local developer Homer Williams, both of whom have criticized
the city’s response to homelessness. The planned facility was promised as a
“navigation center” of sorts for the Portland houseless population, helping
connect those in need to existing services. Boyle and Williams promised
the facility would be up and running by the end of 2018. Williams’ staff is
now saying it’ll be built sometime in the spring, just as the deadliest
months of the year for Portland’s homeless population come to a close.
Meet Commissioner Hardesty
January 1 marked the first day in nearly 20 years that Dan Saltzman wasn’t
working in Portland City Hall. Portland elected Jo Ann Hardesty, a former
NAACP leader and former state legislator, to take over for the retiring
commissioner in 2019. Hardesty’s promised a new era of police
accountability in city hall, starting with a complete audit of the entire
Portland Police Bureau and a freeze on officer hires. She’s also called to
sever ties with the city’s controversial Joint Terrorism Task Force, a
partnership with the FBI that some say undermines community trust with
local cops. Hardesty is expected to shake up the political tilt of the current
council—especially now with Saltzman, the council’s most conservative
commissioner, stepping down. We’re ready for some new energy on the
council dais.
Cops Without Guns
The city will kick off the year by hiring a brand-new variety of cop, dubbed a
“Public Safety Support Specialist” (PS3 for short). PS3s, employed by the
Portland Police Bureau (PPB), will not carry a firearm, make arrests, or drive
patrol cars. They’ll wear tan khakis and green polos with a PPB emblem,
and instead of guns, they’ll be armed with pepper spray. According to the
PPB contract, these new employees will investigate property crime, traffic
accidents, and other low-level, non-violent crimes. Skeptics suggest the
position is just a watered-down response to Portlanders who have called for
unarmed officers who are more engaged with homeless and mentally ill
populations. The city, meanwhile, says PS3s will simply free up other
officers’ schedules and shorten the notoriously long 911 call response times
within the bureau.
Major League Baseball on the Horizon
In 2018, the idea of a Major League Baseball (MLB) team in Portland went
from being a complete fantasy to being a fantasy with renderings. In
November, the Portland Diamond Project—a group spearheaded by former
Nike executive Craig Cheek and boasting investors that include Seattle
Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson and singer Ciara—announced it had
entered into a tentative deal to purchase the Port of Portland’s Terminal 2,
with plans to turn it into a baseball stadium. Mayor Ted Wheeler is on
board with the idea—he said the city wouldn’t directly fund the stadium but
would be open to waiving associated development fees—but the process of
wooing the league can take years. Will this stadium be built? Will it include
a sky tram to rival OHSU’s, as the renderings suggest? What will the new
MLB team be called? How much will everyone hate that name? Will the
ballpark charge $11 for a 10-ounce Coors Light? Stay tuned—or, you know,
insert baseball analogy about waiting to see here.
Affordable Housing: Coming Soon (Again)
In November, voters in the greater Portland region approved a $652.8
million bond to create about 4,000 units of affordable housing. It will be up
to Metro, the regional governing body, to facilitate the dispersal of that
bond, which will fund housing projects for low-income residents of
Multnomah, Washington, and Clackamas counties. Oregon voters also
passed Measure 102, which gives municipal governments the freedom to
partner with private developers and nonprofits when spending bond
dollars on housing projects. The passage of this ballot measure will unlock
some additional funding for the City of Portland, which passed its own
housing bond back in 2016. All of this adds up to more affordable housing,
both within and outside of Portland city limits. If all goes to plan, the vague
projects promised in the Metro bond will begin to come into focus in 2019.
● ● ● ● ●
    ✉
TAGS: NEWS BEST OF
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
Blair Stenvick
Blair Stenvick is a former news reporter and culture writer for the Portland Mercury.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Updated: The Willamette River is Swimmable Again, Health Officials Say
Fundraiser for City Councilor Displaced by Fire Creates Legal Complexity
A Night of Terror: Civil Disobedience Met With Extreme Force at Portland ICE Facility
“There Is No Money”: I-5 Rose Quarter Project Slated for August Groundbreaking,
Budget Woes and All
Portland-Area Starbucks Baristas Remain on Strike Over Labor Contract, Wage Disputes
City of Portland Begins Enforcement of ‘Public Camping’ Rules This Weekend
Editors' Picks
PHOTO ESSAY: Best in Bow-Wow-Wow
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Pants Trivia About Hackers! Robots! And Assholes Who Act Like
Robots!
Food Review: Street Disco Went from a Pop-Up to a Brick-and-Mortar Success
Thorns, Timbers Fan Groups Sever Ties With Club Management Over "Devastating"
Report
THE TRASH REPORT: Old Politicians, Old Influencers, Old Beefs, and Me!
Tom Cruise and Ed Begley Jr. Are Relatable, We Owe Bats an Apology, and I, Elinor Jones,
am now a Sports Journalist
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286