SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW SHOP NOW
VANCOUVER
Who is Jay Inslee?
Take a closer look at Jay Inslee, Democratic candidate for President.

Author: Travis Pittman
Published: 4:05 AM PST March 1, 2019
Updated: 4:09 AM PST March 1, 2019
Gov. Jay Robert Inslee
Born: February 9, 1951
Birthplace: Seattle, Washington
Age on Inauguration Day: 69
Party affiliation: Democrat
Campaign website: jayinslee.com
Education: University of Washington (Bachelor's degree in economics); Willamette University
College of Law (Juris Doctor)
Professions: Attorney and prosecutor
Public office: City prosecutor for Selah, Wash.; Washington state representative 1988-1992;
United States Department of Health and Human Services regional director 1997-1998; U.S.
Representative 1993-1995 and 1999-2012; Washington state governor 2013-present
Personal: Inslee and wife Trudi have three sons and three grandchildren
Life and career highlights
An advocate for fighting climate change, he has pushed for a switch to a clean energy
economy.
Has been a vocal and legal critic of President Trump. Washington state has launched or
joined several lawsuits against Trump’s executive orders, including the so-called Muslim ban.
Has supported resettlement of Syrian refugees in Washington state. In 2018, Washington
ranked second in the nation in overall refugee resettlement.
Faced criticism for his support of an $8.7 billion tax break for Boeing in 2013, which was the
largest tax subsidy in U.S. history to a private company. Boeing’s Machinists union voiced
frustration with Inslee for pushing a new contract in 2014 that ended their traditional
pensions.
Issued stays of execution to the state's death row inmates in 2014, essentially suspending
the death penalty. The state Supreme Court threw out the death penalty in 2018, citing racial
bias.
Vetoed bill that would have exempted the Washington state Legislature from a voter-
approved Public Records Act.
-50% -50%
-51%
Sources: Congress.gov; Washington state official bio; Ballotpedia; The Seattle Times; US State
Department; NPR
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Answer 30 Questions To Find Out Your IQ Score
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored
Know your IQ. Take the test
Answer 30 quick questions and get your real IQ score instantly. No boring forms - just a pure brain
challenge. Most people never reach 120… Think you can do better?
MyIQ|Sponsored Learn More
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
The Gelatin Weight-Loss Shortcut Everyone Is Talking About — Simple, Homemade,
And Effective
NewBody Project|Sponsored Learn More
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
PREVIEW: #6 Purdue vs Wisconsin PREDICTIONS—Will Braden Smith SET the Big 10
Record?
KGW
Will Sam Darnold RISE TO THE MOMENT for Seattle Seahawks in NFC West Title
Game?
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...