Give A Little, Change A Lot!
🎁 DONATE NOW
Support the Portland Mercury this holiday season

👀
Where to Find the Mercury Near You!
🥶😎
The Mercury's Very Cool Guide to WINTER
🤩
The Mercury is Hiring!
NEWS
Jan 31, 2019 at 4:00 am
Local Advocates Set Priorities for Legislative
Session
BLAIR STENVICK & ALEX ZIELINSKI
MERCURY STAFF ILLUSTRATION. ICONS BY THE NOUN PROJECT: CREATICCA CREATIVE AGENCY, PRETTYCONS, FAUZAN AKBAR, CHANUT IS INDUSTRIES,
MADE BY MADE, SNEHAL PATIL, CHAMELEON DESIGN
O
regon’s 2019 legislative session is upon us. With a supermajority in
both the House and Senate chambers, Oregon Democrats are poised
to pass a landslide of progressive bills that in the past might have
been scuttled by conservative lawmakers. As the session rolls forward,
lawmakers will be looking to local advocacy groups to find out what issues
their constituents want prioritized. To get a peek at those priorities, we
asked Portland advocacy organizations where they’ll be focusing their
energy this legislative session.
Housing
The one issue that shows up in every advocacy group’s list of
legislative priorities comes as no surprise: basic access to affordable
housing. Unions, transportation nonprofits, teacher organizations, and civil
rights groups are throwing their weight behind a bill that would prevent no-
cause evictions from occurring after a year of tenancy while setting a yearly
maximum for rent increases.
Tenant advocacy groups, however, are split on the legislation—while the
Community Alliance of Tenants (CAT) call the limits a major step forward
for a rent-burdened state, Portland Tenants United (PTU) say this
“watered-down” measure still panders to landlords.
Criminal Justice
Criminal justice groups like Oregon Justice Resource Center are ready to
start chipping away at Measure 11, a state law mandating that offenders
between 15 and 17 years old who are charged with violent crimes are
automatically tried and sentenced as adults, meaning their prison time can
often span decades.
Bills expected to go to a vote this session include overturning parts of
Measure 11 affecting minors, banning life without parole sentences for
minors, and mandating transfer hearings for 18-year-olds before they’re
moved from a youth correctional facility to an adult prison.
Education
Oregon’s tenuously structured Public Employee Retirement
System (PERS) continues to eat up resources otherwise reserved for
funding public schools. This has unfairly pitted public employees against
public school students, according to union representatives, who are calling
for the legislature to find an alternative revenue source.
The Portland Association of Teachers would like the legislature to pass a
budget that increases funding to reduce class sizes, provides additional
mental health services in schools, and invests in pre-kindergarten
programs.
Labor
Unions representing public employees, like AFSCME and SEIU
503, want to see lightened workloads for public defenders in hopes of
allowing low-income defendants a better shot at avoiding prison—a move
that could also prevent burnout among overworked and underpaid
attorneys. Unions are also looking out for their members at the other end of
the justice system, calling on the state to free up more worker’s
compensation dollars for public corrections staff with post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD).
Elections
Governor Kate Brown has made campaign finance reform a
priority for Salem lawmakers in 2019, calling for financial limits on Oregon’s
currently limitless campaign contributions.
While fair election advocates in Portland support Brown’s proposed caps,
it’s not the only area of election reform they’d liketo be taken on by
representatives. Notably, organizers with the Bus Project—a group working
to make politics accessible for younger Oregonians—want the state’s voting
age lowered to 16 and require Oregon-issued ballots to include postage-
paid return envelopes.
Transportation
Local transportation leaders like OPAL Environmental Justice
Oregon are ready for Oregon to turn over state-owned highways like SE
Powell and East 82nd to Portland’s Bureau of Transportation. Local control
over these busy thoroughfares could allow the city to regulate
environmental air quality and public transportation access in some of
Portland’s more disadvantaged communities.
At the same time, OPAL’s pushing state representatives to introduce
stronger environmental protections than those currently on the table.
OPAL has joined forces with organizations representing people of color—
like the NAACP and Asian Pacific American Network of Oregon (APANO)—
to propose an Oregon-centric “Green New Deal” to state legislators, one
that tightens limits on transportation emissions and phases out state
reliance on fossil fuels. Portland leaders like City Commissioners Chloe
Eudaly and Jo Ann Hardesty have already signaled their support, but it’s up
to state lawmakers to place it on the agenda.
Hate Crimes
According to FBI data, Portland saw 18 reported hate crimes in
2017. Eugene, a city with nearly 500,000 fewer people than Portland, saw 72.
Portland organizations working regularly with folks who feel targeted based
on their perceived race, religion, gender, or any other identifying factors say
this data shows that Portland is failing at tracking these types of crimes.
That’s why groups like Unite Oregon and the ACLU are working with
Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum to strengthen the definition of a “bias
crime” as well as the penalties—along with creating a more accessible
support system for people who believe they’ve been targeted.
● ● ● ● ●
 Comments 1     ✉
TAGS: NEWS
Blair Stenvick
Blair Stenvick is a former news reporter and culture writer for the Portland Mercury.
✉ 
Alex Zielinski
Alex Zielinski is a former News Editor for the Portland Mercury. She's here to tell stories about
economic inequities, cops, civil rights, and weird city politics that you should probably be
paying attention to.
✉ 
If you enjoy articles like this, please help the Mercury continue our mission of providing up-to-
the-minute information, progressive journalism, and fun things to do in Portland by making a
small recurring monthly contribution. Never forget: Your help is essential and very much
appreciated!
CONTRIBUTE NOW
More In News
Elected Officials, Advocates Urge Oregon’s Congressional Delegation to “Block the
Bombs” to Israel
“Antifa Hellfire”: Amid Local Uncertainty, White House Attempts to Justify National
Guard Invasion of Portland
Portland Children’s Levy Funds Set to Be Disbursed After City Halted, Then Restored
Grant Recommendations
Zenith Energy Legal Fight Highlights Gaps in Portland’s Environmental Guardrails
It’s Been 10 Years Since Portland Adopted Vision Zero. What’s Changed?
“We’re Investing for the Long Term”: How the Future of Portland’s Historic Albina
District is Coming Together
Editors' Picks
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy-Ass Trivia About Fancy Cocaine, Janet Jackson, and Who Wants to
Be Buried Alive?
POP QUIZ PDX: Sassy Ass Trivia About Volcanoes, Jill Biden, and Your Newest Corporate
Sponsor!
Portland City Councilors Will Lobby For Change in State Law to Pave Way For
Criminalization of Drugs
THE TRASH REPORT: Debt Ceiling, Toilets, and Bears, Oh My!
"Free, Free Palestine": Portlanders Rally for Gazans, Ask Local Politicians to Support
Cease-Fire
POP QUIZ PDX: Farewell to Darcelle, Celebs Who ❤ Portland, and WOLVERINES (All
Types)!
Popular Articles
Oregon’s New ID Scanning Law: What Changed on January 1
One of Portland’s Few Black-Owned Music Venues is Facing Eviction
The Mercury's Best Photos of 2025
Immigrant Rights Groups Allege Multnomah County Jail is Violating Sanctuary Laws
Mayor Wilson Puts Portland Housing Bureau Director On Leave
Despite DOJ Intervention, Portland Police are Still Killing People in Mental Health Crisis
“A Dangerous Precedent”: PGE Faces Major Backlash for Forest Park Utility Proposal
Just Can't Get Enough?
Sign up for our newsletter for news recaps, updates, and more!
email address
Subscribe
is a proud member of the
network
MASTHEAD AD INFO & RATES SELL TICKETS JOBS AT PORTLAND MERCURY
CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE TAKEDOWN POLICY
FIND THE MERCURY NEAR YOU SUBSCRIBE TO THE MERCURY IN PRINT
Support Portland Mercury
All contents © Noisy Creek, Inc.
PO Box 86208, Portland, OR 97286