BUSINESS
Class action lawsuit filed against
-49%
Safeway over 1% surcharge
This is the second class action lawsuit filed against a Portland business
for passing on the Portland clean energy tax to customers.
AAdd 11 ooff 11

 00:00/00:00 x 
IN OTHER NEWS
Sneaker-themed Deadstock
Coffee announces new Old
Town location
Author: Jared Cowley (KGW)
Published: 4:42 PM PDT October 21, 2019
Updated: 5:55 PM PDT October 21, 2019
PORTLAND, Ore. — A class action lawsuit was filed Monday against Safeway, accusing the
grocery store corporation of charging customers a 1% fee to pay for a tax the city is charging
large retailers to help pay for Portland's clean energy initiative.
The tax, which began Jan. 1, 2019, applies to large retailers with gross income from retail sales
of $1 billion or more in the U.S. and $500,000 in the City of Portland.
This is the second class action lawsuit filed against a Portland business for passing on the city
tax to customers. The first lawsuit was filed against AT&T over a 5-cent billing surcharge.
RELATED: Dozens of Oregon customers file lawsuit against AT&T over surcharge
"The surcharge was passed along to the customer to pay Safeway's obligation to help fund the
Portland Clean Energy Initiative," said Portland attorney Michael Fuller, who is organizing both
this class action lawsuit and the lawsuit against AT&T.
RELATED: VERIFY: Why is a tax included on my Winco receipt?
VVEERRIIFFYY:: WWhhyy iiss ttaaxx iinncclluuddeedd oonn mmyy WWiinnccoo rreecceeiipptt??
The plaintiff named in the lawsuit, Joshua Gagnier, visited the Safeway located at 3527
Southeast 122nd Avenue on Oct. 18 and purchased a bottle of Quail Oak Rose wine. The listed
price on the shelf for the wine was $3.33, but when Gagnier looked at the receipt, he noticed a
3-cent surcharge.
Fuller said Safeway violated the Oregon Unlawful Trade Practices Act because "the surcharge
was not disclosed to the customer in the advertised price of the wine he purchased."
If you're interested in joining the suit, contact Fuller.
Read the lawsuit
Download this PDF 1 / 9
RELATED: Portland voters pass clean energy measure
Here’s How To Get the Most Out of Grammarly
Unlock your best writing with AI assistance and team features. Upgrade to Grammarly Pro.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Spine Specialists Says: Do This For 15min To Relieve Sciatica
Smoothspine|Sponsored Learn More
Tirzepatide Wins For Weight Loss - Only $119/Month
Ships to your door. No insurance required. 3 simple steps.
FuturHealth|Sponsored
Want To Be More Productive?
The majority of Grammarly Pro users report less stress and stronger writing skills.
Grammarly|Sponsored Learn More
Salvatore Ferragamo Square Sunglasses, 54mm
Salvatore Ferragamo Square Sunglasses, 54mm
Bloomingdale's|Sponsored Shop now
She Mixed Gelatin With This - Now She Can't Stop Losing Weight
Wellness Daily|Sponsored Learn More
They Seem Innocent: 3 Common Foods Neurologists Now Connect to Dementia
94% Of People Eat It Everyday! (Stop Before It's Too Late)
Memory Institute|Sponsored Learn More
Wet first weekend of the new year
KGW
Two mothers connect over a song, one son's heart and another's life saved
KGW
LOADING NEXT ARTICLE...