SUPPORT
Will the Portland Clean Energy Tax Be Passed on to Consumers?
Check Your Trash Bill.
The expected revenues from the tax expanded greatly—after voters passed it.
ByRachel Monahan | Published on June 26, 2019 5:32AM PDT
(Let Ideas Compete / Flickr)
Starting next week, most Portland households will pay 75 cents more a month for garbage
collection. About 20 cents of that increase happened because Portlanders voted last
November to tax big companies for climate change projects.
But it's not clear voters understood they were agreeing to tax their trash and recycling
pickup. That's partly because proponents of the Portland Clean Energy Fund surcharge said
the tax on big corporations would not be passed on to customers. (Companies with more
than $1 billion in sales nationally and $500,000 within the city are subject to the 1 percent
Get Portland’s top stories delivered, every morning.
increase in their business license tax.)
Subscribe to our Daily Primer.
"I wEmasa silu Arpdrdirseesds, *because I really thought that Portland voters were told explicitly that this is
something that big corporations were going to be paying, not the average voters," says
Stuart Weitz, 54, a Northwest Portland homeowner who was alerted to the increase by a
mailer sent to city residences earlier this month.
Subscribe
(He voted against the measure in November.)
HFeE'sA TnUotR EalDo nPeO iSnT being surprised. As city officials and businesses have learned this spring,
the scope of the Clean Energy Fund has expanded.
Five Ways To Enjoy Winter On Mt. Hood
A 2017 analysis by the city's Revenue Division of a draft of Measure 26-201 predicted the tax
Sponsored Content
would raise between $35 million and $51 million a year. During the campaign, proponents
argued the clean energy tax would raise roughly $40 million a year.
THE LATEST
ADVERTISING
DRINK
Deadstock Coffee Is Alive in Old Town
FOOD
What We’re Cooking This Week: Radicchio Fried Rice With Hot Honey
CITY
Gateway Is Where Good Intentions Stumbled
COURTS
Mother Forced to Dig Up Son’s Burial Vault
But in February, after voters passed the measure, the Revenue Division updated its estimate
of tax receipts—to between $54 million and $71 million a year.
How did this happen? "One primary difference between the 2017 analysis and the 2019
GIVE!GUIDE
Give!Guide Raises $9.2 Million for Portland-Area Nonprofits
analysis was the definition of 'retail sale,'" says Thomas Lannom, director of the Revenue
Division.
The draft analyzed in 2017 defined it as "the sale of products, goods or services to the
NEWS
general public by a LarWgWe R’s eMtaoislte-rR."ead Stories of 2025
But the measure passed by voters was far broader. It "means the sale to a consumer for use
or consumption, and not for resale," the measure states. "Retail sale includes but is not
NEWS
limited to the sale of services, including but not limited to retail banking services."
Multnomah County to Shut Sunstone Way’s Market Street Shelter
It's not clear whether the broader definition roped in garbage companies or they were
included from the start. (Lannom says he doesn't know.)
NEWS
Trump Indicates He Will Send Oregon National Guard Members Home
But it does show the tax is being passed along to Portland residents. During the campaign
last year, proponents argued the surcharge would be absorbed by big corporations and
there would not be a direct effect on consumers. Opponents said the tax would function
much like a sales tax.
Read More
Garbage pickup, while unique in being highly regulated by the city, is an example of the way
voters will, in fact, be directly affected.
Just three of 11 trash haulers have revenues large enough to be subject to the tax increase.
But the city spreads the costs of garbage pickup to all customers. And on May 29, the City
Council voted to do so.
Garbage haulers have asked the Revenue Division that they be considered utilities, which are
exempt from the surcharge. But haulers are not considered utilities in city code, says
Lannom.
This is at least the second way the tax will directly affect city taxpayers.
As WW reported earlier this month ("Clean Break," June 5, 2019), the draft rules also make
clear that construction companies will be taxed, which in turn could raise the cost of
publicly financed projects, including schools and affordable housing.
The same groups that campaigned for a $40 million-a-year measure are now lobbying to
maintain the broader definition. Advocates defend the increased scope of the tax.
"We have always acknowledged that the Revenue Division alone could make the full
determination of who was subject to the surcharge, and the measure's definition of 'retail
sales' explicitly includes the sale of services," says Khanh Pham, organizing director at OPAL
Environmental Justice Oregon and a spokeswoman for the Portland Clean Energy Fund
community coalition.
"Furthermore, we built into the measure a process for the nine-person grant committee of
Portland community members to suggest changes to City Council if they deem it absolutely
necessary."
The advocates also say the benefits of the measure outweigh the increased garbage fees.
"Garbage haulers are regulated by the city, a very different process than retail goods which
will not increase in price," says Jenny Lee, advocacy director at APANO and a spokeswoman
for the coalition. "This tiny garbage rate increase will be only pennies a month on average
per household. Meanwhile, Portlanders and communities will see many financial benefits
from the fund's living-wage jobs, job training and energy savings, along with healthier, more
vibrant communities."
ADVERTISING
SmartAsset-Sponsored
Who Should Use a Family Trust?
Learn More ⌃
Unless the coalition of advocates supports a change, that puts city commissioners in a tight
political spot.
Portland voters passed the measure overwhelmingly: 65 to 35 percent. Since then, Mayor
Ted Wheeler and Commissioner JoAnn Hardesty have deferred to the coalition's views.
"PCEF is a community-led initiative, and any amendments to the rules should have support
from the PCEF community coalition," says Wheeler's spokeswoman Eileen Park.
Hardesty agrees. "This measure was passed by the community with provisions in place that
allow for alterations if needed," she says. "I'm committed to following the community's lead
in reviewing and addressing the impacts of the surcharge and making changes if and when
it's necessary."
(Commissioner Chloe Eudaly's chief of staff Marshall Runkel declined to comment.)
Commissioner Amanda Fritz said last month she supported a surcharge on her garbage bill
to address climate change.
"I was really pleased to hear that I'm going to be paying 20 cents more per month," said Fritz.
Rachel Monahan | rmonahan@wweek.com
Rachel Monahan joined Willamette Week in 2016. She covers housing and City Hall.
Willamette Week’s reporting has concrete impacts that change laws, force action from
civic leaders, and drive compromised politicians from public office.Support WW
SUPPORT
Around The Web
CVS Hides This $1 Knee Experts North Carolina
Generic Viagra - Stunned: New Device Legalizes Online
Here’s The Aisle It's is Changing Lives Cannabis Purchases
Really in Fast
Mood
Friday Plans RejuvaKnee
Seniors Born 1939- If Your Dog Licks Its Hard-Boiled Eggs:
1969 Receive 11 Paws, Stop Feeding What to Know About
Benefits This Month Them This Potential Risks
If They Ask Immediately
Well Being For All
Super Saving Online ExpertsInPetHealth
1 Odd Trick Restores Cardiologist Warns Say Goodbye to
Your Eyes To Perfect Americans: "Pour out Ingrown & Thick
20/20 Vision The Bottled Water" Nails With This
Revolutionary Nail
Hartford Review Journal Well Being For All
Clipper
peoasis
Read More
00:01 03:18
ALSO ON WILLAMETTE WEEK
9 days ago •3 comments 4 days ago •12 comments
WWhhyy DDoo WWaarrnneerr PPaacciiff
AAiirrlliinneess TTeellll RReecceeiivveess SSoomm
PPaasssseennggeerrss …… FFuunnddiinngg ttoo ……
Willamette Week Comment Policy
Comments that are irrelevant or incendiary will be deleted. Got it
Disruptive users will be banned at WW's discretion.
What do you think?
2 Responses
Upvote Funny Love
Surprised Angry Sad
23 Comments  1 Login
G
Join the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS ?
Name
Want more?
Subscribe to Willamette Week's newsletter to get the best of each issue delivered straight to your inbox.
✉ Enter email address Subscribe
Hide this message
 Share Best Newest Oldest
M Matt Nunya − ⚑
7 years ago
Of course a tax to businesses will get passed on to the consumer. The politicians that said it
wouldn't were either lying or have no understanding of economics. No surprise there. 'We'
elect the dumbest of the dumb here in Portlandia.
7 0 Reply ⥅
7 py ⥅
Captain Monty − ⚑
7 years ago
How naive are the SJW's? The tax is a cost of doing business....like rent, capital costs, labor
etc. Costs go up....so do prices you pay. Keep adding taxes to business kids. There is no free
lunch in the real world.
7 0 Reply ⥅
L Leviathan > Captain Monty − ⚑
7 years ago
Don't confuse naivete with being a sycophant. They know
0 0 Reply ⥅
Z zbignew − ⚑
7 years ago
The headline asks if the tax will be passed on and the first paragraph answers the question. Yes
it's being passed on. Why have a headline that makes it look like some in depth investigation
on the issue? When does a company not pass on their cost of doing business?
5 0 Reply ⥅
pdan > zbignew − ⚑
7 years ago
"When does a company not pass on their cost of doing business?"
To you and all the other armchair economists above, a company doesn't pass on their
cost when the market won't accept a cost increase, generally because competitors are
willing to keep prices the same or lower in order to compete.
It's why large incumbents have advantages over small start-ups, the small guy would
love to charge more, but depending on your widget or service, how much you can
charge is based on how much the market will bear.
There are lots of other places that charge can be eaten, including finding efficiencies
elsewhere, reducing executive pay and bonuses, streamlining, etc.
Yes, generally speaking, costs get passed on if and when they can be passed on, but
it's not remotely that simple of a direct effect in the real world depending on which
markets and which businesses you're talking about.
2 1 Reply ⥅
C cspdx11 > pdan − ⚑
7 years ago
Let me know when I can select my garbage collection in Portland (or most
anycity)
any city)
3 0 Reply ⥅
Z zbignew > pdan − ⚑
7 years ago edited
And in this case, garbage collection they have the monopoly, so no
competition. And where does your economics degree come from? Your
armchair isn't any better than mine.
2 0 Reply ⥅
R Reb > pdan − ⚑
6 years ago
Of course, if the owners of said companies would accept less money, the
costs wouldn't be passed on. There is no reason a hugely proftable company
to pass a small increase to consumers except they just want to be greedy
(and give their CEOs even more money).
0 0 Reply ⥅
Jeremiah's Johnson > pdan 7 years ago − ⚑
"There are lots of other places that charge can be eaten, including finding
efficiencies elsewhere, reducing executive pay and bonuses, streamlining,
etc."
When was the last time executive pay and bonuses were reduced by any
large corporation to offset a new tax? Someone would have to be daft, high
or some kind of shill to make that claim. John and cspdx11 are correct about
the monopoly, negating the rest of your lecture. It's always the private
profiles who produce the most garbage.
0 0 Reply ⥅
R Reb > Jeremiah's Johnson 6 years ago − ⚑
"When was the last time executive pay and bonuses were reduced
by any large corporation to offset a new tax?"
Never. That is because the rich are greedy jerks. It is insane that
people flipping out over 20 cents are ok with themselves getting
less and less money every year (adjusted for cost) while the rich
get tax breaks, more pay and bonuses.
I hope such people keep getting poorer and poorer. Of course, they
will find a boogieman to blame, like Muslims, or immigrants or
brown people or...
Talk about shooting yourself in the foot because you are so hateful
and stupid.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Rf jones − ⚑
7 years ago edited
If you wonder about where the money will come from for this garbage. Look in the mirror.
Every time, geniuses. Look at all the wonderful street maintenance going on since the dime a
gallon gas tax was passed. As in division st. east of 122nd. It's All b.s.
4 0 Reply ⥅
C criddler > Rf jones − ⚑
7 years ago
social enterprise ventures related to additional transient coddling, obviously.
0 0 Reply ⥅
K Katydid57 − ⚑
7 years ago
We're always lied to when it comes to these measures. Which is why I vote "no" whenever
possible. Other Portlanders should do the same. So sick of these bait and switch tactics.
4 0 Reply ⥅
E Eugene − ⚑
7 years ago
And Portland voters continue to drink the liberal Kool Aid believing taxes on businesses aren’t
passed on to them. Renters will also see this passed on. Useful idiots.
3 0 Reply ⥅
D Dude − ⚑
7 years ago
$2 a year. I'm outraged!
2 0 Reply ⥅
Frank Lessa > Dude − ⚑
7 years ago
Rent consumes more than half my income.
I literally cannot afford a cost increase.
0 0 Reply ⥅
C criddler − ⚑
7 years ago
The city has been unwilling to investigate and prosecute offensive littering against transients.
Yet another move by the city that discriminates against the housed. Maybe we should all just
start leaving trash on side of the road? It's discrimination for the city to take enforcement
action for that against one economic group while letting it go on for transients.
2 0 Reply ⥅
W Will Vancouver − ⚑
7 years ago
I just moved out of the Pearl district . I’m done dealing with The City’s Planning staff. The
saddest part is the division at the City of Portland in charge of supposedly regulating garbage
companies has never actually enforced anything significant against them. They get favors and
positive PR about increasing recycling by working closely with giant corporations such as
Waste Management.
People don’t need PR, they need enforcement.
The entire staff should be moved to an enforcer arm of the city like the police, the building
department or the city Noise Office at the Mayors Office.
If they just want to keep taking more taxpayer money, fire the lazy bums and get us ethical
enforcement please.
And why do they need so many staff if we can’t get call back or action.
Who is in charge of these jokers?
2 0 Reply ⥅
L Leviathan > Will Vancouver − ⚑
7 years ago
Absolutely no one
0 0 Reply ⥅
R Reb − ⚑
6 years ago
so 20c increase bothers some of you but the millions of dollars CEO's get while you are not
getting a pay increase doesn't. some of you are really so hateful that you screw yourself to help
the rich.
0 0 Reply ⥅
Frank Lessa − ⚑
7 years ago
If only 3 of 11 trash haulers have revenues large enough to be subject to the tax increase, why
do ALL customers have to pay?
My neighborhood corner market doesn't pay/charge more when it is exempt from this tax
whichappliestosupermarkets
Help us dig deeper.
Contribute to Local Journalism.
Donate
Find a Paper About WW
Sign up for our Newsletters Add Your Event To Our Calendar
Subscribe or Get a Back Issue Advertise
Become a Friend of Willamette Week Work With Us
Contribute or Intern
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Twitter Get Portland's top stories delivered straight to
YouTube your inbox, everyday.
Facebook
Instagram Email Address *
Bluesky
RSS Feeds
Subscribe