SUPPORT
Portland’s Pent-Up Energy Pours Back Into the Bars, at Least Until
9:30 pm
As with the rest of the state, Portland opened unevenly, with the action concentrated in the
businesses eager—or desperate—to serve customers.
ByWW Staff | Published on June 23, 2020 9:23PM PDT
Read More
Get Portland’s top stories delivered, every morning.
Subscribe to our Daily Primer.
Email Address *
Subscribe
FEATURED POST
The Safety Net for Seniors: How Meals on Wheels People Is
Feeding Portland’s Most Vulnerable
North Bar on Southeast Division. IMAGE: Brian Burk.
Sponsored Content
Each night for the past three weeks, the primary action in downtown Portland was
THE LATEST
protesters pressing against a chain-link fence surrounding the Multnomah County Justice
DRINK
Center.
Deadstock Coffee Is Alive in Old Town
But on June 21, just 11 blocks north, a new phenomenon: half-naked go-go dancers.
Two nights after Gov. Kate Brown allowed some businesses in Multnomah County to reopen,
FOOD
What We’re Cooking This Week: Radicchio Fried Rice With Hot Honey
rock club Dante's held its first paid event in three months: Sinferno Cabaret, the weekly
burlesque show it has hosted for two decades.
CITY
Gateway Is Where Good Intentions Stumbled
As lingerie-clad dancers undulated onstage to songs that included a remix of Childish
Gambino's "This is America," about two dozen patrons watched from seats spaced six feet
apart, with the exception of one man who was more interested in the video poker machines.
COURTS
Before entering the veMnouteh,e era Fcohr caetdt eton dDeige Uspu bSmoni’tst Beudr tiaol Va atuelmt perature check at the
door. Once inside, many patrons appeared to remove their masks—which is allowed when
eating or drinking.
Read More
GIVE!GUIDE
Give!Guide Raises $9.2 Million for Portland-Area Nonprofits
The MC encouraged the audience to tip the dancers, as each one would donate their
earnings to different causes, including the American Civil Liberties Union and the National
Urban League.
"It's really easy to get people excited about tits and ass," says dancer Mystic O'Reilley. "It's a
NEWS
WW’s Most-Read Stories of 2025
lot harder to get people excited about civil rights."
NEWS
For the past 12 weeks, MPuolrttnloamndaehr Cso huanvtey two aSihteudt Sfuonr stthoen eg Wo-aayh’se Madar skiegtn Satlr etoet rSeheemlteerrge from
lockdown, watching with envy and fear as every Oregon county but Multnomah was
approved to reopen by the governor.
NEWS
REUNITED: A gathering at SinTortut’sm Lpil’ ICnodoipceartsetosw Hne P Wubi &ll GSreinll do nO Nroergtohena sNt aHtaiolsneya lS Gtreueatr. d(B rMiaenm Bubrekr)Ssi nHoottm’s eLil’
Cooperstown Pub & Grill, 5851 NE Halsey St.
The wait was extended an additional week after Oregon's most populous county
experienced an alarming rise in COVID-19 cases. On June 17, Gov. Brown allowed Multnomah
County to resume drinking and dining together, even though the rise in cases showed no
signs of slowing.
Three months is enough time to reverse habits, and 7,000 cases is a lot of sickness. That
made once-common sights appear uncanny, almost sinister. Burlesque dancers, once a
staple of Old Town, felt as alien as barber shops, tattoo parlors and ordering a shot at Kelly's
Olympian.
As with the rest of the state, Portland opened unevenly, with the action concentrated in the
businesses eager—or desperate—to serve customers. Many Portland blocks saw little
difference: Civic mainstays from Reel M Inn to the Zipper stuck to takeout service. In other
places, especially on the westside, the 10 pm bar curfew only seemed to intensify the
activity, packing it into a smaller window of time.
Our reporters wandered into several corners of the city, seeing how Portland residents took
their first steps back into old customs—some more enthusiastically than others. Here's what
we observed.
Read More
Tattoo artist M.J. Beaton at New Rose Tattoo on Southeast Division Street. IMAGE: Brian Burk.
Nob Hill
9 pm Friday, June 19
By 8 pm, Scott Edwards and Sam Kazmer were officially starving.
The two friends had put their names on the list at Bantam Tavern, the neighborhood bar
now using the parking lot it shares with Indian restaurant Swagat as an outdoor dining area.
Its eight picnic tables were full, as was the bar's snug indoor seating—two booths, a third out
of commission to provide proper spacing, plus two counters. An hour wait.
"So we were like, 'All right, let's walk down the street and get a snack,'" says Edwards, a 31-
year-old Nike employee.
The pair managed to get seated outside at McMenamins Blue Moon. But after 15 minutes, no
server emerged to take their order. So Edwards and Kazmer decamped to Top Burmese,
where they had the tiny dining room all to themselves and ordered samosas to tide them
over.
It was a similar scene up and down Northwest 21st Avenue. At SanSai Japanese Grill, a single
solo diner sat indoors, with two parties at outdoor tables. A few blocks away, Schmizza Pub
and Grub was back to offering karaoke—against Gov. Brown's orders. A smattering of
customers looked on as a woman belted out Rush's "Tom Sawyer" from behind a powder-
blue mask.
Edwards and Kazmer had returned to Bantam Tavern, hoping to finally get a seat and a full
Read More
meal. The bar was no longer taking names for the wait list—per the rules of Phase 1, closing
time was only an hour away.
But for Edwards, at least, the hassle beat cooking at home for the umpteenth time in a
row."I'm still a little cautious, but I've been getting restless for sure," he says. And he'll
certainly be eating out again—"if we don't reclose, which feels like a possibility," he adds.
JASON COHEN.
Stylist Amantha Patrick with customer at Hollywood Barber and Style Shop on NE 42nd Ave. IMAGE: Brian Burk.
Kerns
2:30 pm Saturday, June 20
Todd Hammer could barely keep up.
"Everyone wants in," said the hairstylist at Holiday Hair Studio in Kerns. "This is a crazy day
for me. I started at 8 am and I probably won't finish until 8:30 tonight. It's nonstop."
It was Hammer's first day back on the job in three months, and he had eight back-to-back
appointments. As each client left his chair, Hammer took the barber cape tied around their
necks and threw it in the nearby washing machine. While the capes soaked, Hammer
cleaned each of his tools with more precision than he was taught at cosmetology school.
But the laundry wasn't fast enough to keep up with the stream of customers. So he jumped
on Amazon Prime and ordered a dozen more capes.
In his chair was Linda, wearing a bubblegum-pink mask and over 100 foils in her blond hair.
She drove in from Vancouver, and hadn't had her hair done since December.
"Todd has never seen my hair this dark," she said, motioning to her roots wrapped iRnead More
aluminum. "I was very, very happy they reopened. I was desperate."
Four blocks north, at Bishops Barbershop, Lane Barrington felt the same about his hair. "It's
the longest it's been in years and years," he laughs. "My girlfriend cut her own hair for the
time, and I was afraid of her doing that to me."
Before his appointment, Lily Allen, who works the front desk, took Barrington's temperature
with a no-touch forehead thermometer. No customers had put up a fuss about getting their
temperature taken or the mask requirement.
After a quick 15 minutes, Barrington emerged from the chair, his once-shaggy locks now
high and tight. He looked like a new man.
"I feel like one," he said. MEIRA GEBEL.
Suey Tagama (left) and Mel Gonzales, employees of Reel M Inn Tavern.
The Pearl District
9:01 pm Saturday, June 20
The sun hadn't even set, and it was already nearing last call at River Pig Saloon.
Per the governor's orders, during this first phase of reopening for Multnomah County, all
bars and restaurants must stop serving customers at 10 pm. And while the crowd at this
University of Oregon-supporting sports bar didn't appear to get the message about wearing
masks indoors, it sure seemed aware of the early closing time: At a point of the night when
most clubs would normally be mixing their first vodka sodas, the place was at maximum
capacity. A slew of young professionals socialized on the boardwalk outside, as club music
bounced.
Read More
A line formed outside, at least five customers deep, and getting deeper. A group of five
walked up, and the bouncer—abiding by the face mask rule, like the rest of the staff—greeted
them with a handshake, just like in pre-COVID times.
It was a similar scene an hour earlier at Jake's Famous Crawfish. A group of four christened
the return of dine-in service with steak, followed by glasses of Crown Royal on the rocks.
Another woman stumbled toward the bartender and ordered a bottle of "champ-pan-yain."
When a couple on the sidewalk, dressed like they'd just gotten married, walked past the
restaurant's large main window, everyone inside raised a glass to them.
Back at River Pig, a young man in a long sleeve shirt who'd been waiting to get in for about
20 minutes finally gave up. It was almost last call, and he lost faith he'd get in. He left the line
and headed toward downtown.
This reporter also left. "Come back earlier next time," the bouncer shouted.
Two hours later, another crowd formed outside the Justice Center—around 300 people,
protesting police brutality for the 22nd straight night. Among them was a familiar face: the
guy from the front of the line at River Pig, holding a can of hard seltzer. SERGIO OLMOS.
See See Motor Coffee Co. on NE Sandy Boulevard. IMAGE: Brian Burk.
St. Johns
3:10 pm Sunday, June 21
From the reception desk at Peak Performance, Kris Whitley watched a steady stream of
people file into the Mousetrap Tavern across North Lombard Street. At the gym where he
works, the return of customers was more like a trickle.
Read More
"There's the tavern and the waffle truck," says Whitley, referring to Peak Performance's
neighbors. "The gym is the slowest. A lot of people seem very hesitant to come in."
At the moment, only four people were working out in the mirror-lined, air conditioning-
blasted space about the size of a basketball court. Blue arrows on the floor governed traffic
flow, disinfectant spray was stationed throughout the room, and a sign on every other
treadmill and elliptical read "Out of Order"—the machines all worked fine, it was just to keep
sweaty patrons from working out next to one another.
On the front desk sat a plastic device Whitley referred to as a "fogger," which looked like a
small leaf blower. Whitley used it to mist the equipment with a disinfectant solution
throughout the day.
Kyle Wagner—a regular at Peak Performance for four years—was practically beaming as he
wiped down the weight plates he'd just used. Without lifting to burn off steam the past few
months, he'd been going for outdoor runs.
"I hated every second of it," says Wagner. "It's just really good to be back." SHANNON
GORMLEY.
Correction: A previous version of this article implied that Dante's was allowing patrons to
enter the building without wearing masks, which is incorrect. WW regrets the error.
Explore Bantam Tavern, Bishops, Dante's, featured bar story, Holiday Hair Studio, Peak
more on: Performance, reopening, River Pig Saloon, Sinferno Cabaret
WW Staff | newstips@wweek.com
Teamwork.
Willamette Week’s reporting has concrete impacts that change laws, force action from
civic leaders, and drive compromised politicians from public office.Support WW
SUPPORT
Read More
Around The Web
Walgreens Hides This $1 Knee Surgeons Baffled: North Carolina Legalizes
Generic Viagra - Here's The New Device Relieves Years Online Cannabis Purchases
Aisle It's Really in of Knee Pain
Mood
Friday Plans RejuvaKnee
Cardiologist Warns: "Avoid Heart Surgeon Begs If Your Dog is Eating Grass,
Bottled Water at All Costs" Americans: Stop Drinking They Need This Nutrient
This Plant Based Milk Immediately
Well Being For All
Well Being For All Dog Super Foods
If Your Dog Licks Its Paws, Beat The Cold in Style With 14 Social Security Changes
Stop Feeding Them This This Essential Winter Hat in 2026 (Plus Benefits Many
Immediately Miss)
Glosritystore
ExpertsInPetHealth DollarPerks Read More
ALSO ON WILLAMETTE WEEK
5 days ago •65 comments 6 days ago •11 comments
DDeeppaarrttiinngg CCiittyy RReeaaddeerrss
AAddmmiinniissttrraattoorr RReessppoonndd ttoo
MMiikkee JJoorrddaann …… RReeaall--EEssttaattee ……
Read More
Read More
Willamette Week Comment Policy
Comments that are irrelevant or incendiary will be deleted. Got it
Disruptive users will be banned at WW's discretion.
What do you think?
0 Responses
Upvote Funny Love Surprised Angry Sad
15 Comments  1 Login
G
Join the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS ?
Name
Want more?
Subscribe to Willamette Week's newsletter to get the best of each issue delivered straight to your inbox.
✉ Enter email address Subscribe
Hide this message
 Share Best Newest Oldest
Ryan Lancecorporal − ⚑
6 years ago
The virus remains deadly. The virus remains deadly. It is easily passed from one person to the
next. Bars and restaurants are the new super spreaders venues...I'll say home thanks, People
will go to bars and restaurants and drive the number of cases up. But, they'll be able to get a
drink, and keep a server off unemployment for another week or two....
1 0 Reply ⥅ Read More
M Mike > Ryan Lancecorporal − ⚑
M
6 years ago
"the virus remains deadly"
So does the response. Except the response affects everyone while the virus has a
mortality rate of about .3%. Smarten up.
3 3 Reply ⥅
D Dizzy > Mike − ⚑
6 years ago
Try closer to .03%.
2 0 Reply ⥅
Scrappymutt > Dizzy − ⚑
6 years ago
I've heard it's actually .000000003%
0 0 Reply ⥅
Jim Gardner > Mike − ⚑
6 years ago
So very few who get sick actually die. Have you read any of the accounts of
those who survived? Most say it is a horrible experience, the sickest they've
ever felt, and recovery is long and ultimately uncertain. You may not die,
but wish you had.
1 0 Reply ⥅
M Mike > Jim Gardner − ⚑
6 years ago
Ok?
0 0 Reply ⥅
Di >Ji G d ⚑
Help us dig deeper.
Contribute to Local Journalism. Read More
Donate
Find a Paper About WW
Sign up for our Newsletters Add Your Event To Our Calendar
Subscribe or Get a Back Issue Advertise
Become a Friend of Willamette Week Work With Us
Contribute or Intern
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Twitter Get Portland's top stories delivered straight to
YouTube your inbox, everyday.
Facebook
Instagram Email Address *
Bluesky
RSS Feeds
Subscribe
Read More