Independent. Member-supported. Independent.
donate now
For the Pacific Northwest. Member-supported.
About OPB Public media funding OPB and KMHD events OPB en Español Partnerships Newsletters
SCIENCE ENVIRONMENT
What You Need To Know About Portland
Clean Energy Measure 26-201
By Ericka Cruz Guevarra (OPB)
Portland, Ore. Sept. 21, 2018 3 a.m.
00:00 / 04:27
This November, Portland voters will decide whether the city should tax certain
businesses to create a clean energy fund.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
The measure is referred to as the Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Initiative
— or the Portland Gross Receipts Tax, depending on who you ask.
Proponents of Measure 26-201, which will formally show up on ballots as the Portland
Clean Energy Community Benefits Initiative, say the city needs money to fund clean
energy projects if it's serious about meeting its clean energy goals.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Proponents of the measure held a press conference at the construction site of the Jade/APANO Multicultural Space (JAMS)
on SE 81st Avenue. It's a 5,000-square-foot community center with solar panels, the kind of community project proponents
say will be supported by the Portland Clean Energy Fund.
Bobby Hayden
To do that, its backers are turning to businesses. Proponents of the measure say they're
the ones who have the financial resources — and obligation — to support the goal
of decreasing carbon emissions while maximizing community benefits like job training.
Proponents expect it to raise more than $30 million annually for clean energy projects,
green jobs and other projects.
Opponents say the people the measure is supposed to help will only be hurt by it. The
measure imposes a 1 percent surcharge tax on certain companies doing business in
Portland, a tax opponents say will impact business choices and eventually pass down to
consumers at the cash register. They say the measure will contribute to the affordability
crisis in Portland, and that a tax on businesses isn't the best way to deal with climate
change.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
What Is The Question Before Voters?
Should large retailers pay a 1 percent tax on the revenue they generate in Portland to
fund renewable energy projects and job training?
Which Retailers Will Be Affected?
The measure aims the tax at businesses that make more than $1 billion in gross revenues
nationally and $500,000 in Portland. The 1 percent tax will apply to the gross revenue
made in Portland.
The tax will not apply to groceries, medicine or health care services.
Who's Behind The Measure?
The measure's supporters are a motley group of environmental and culturally specific
organizations. Its steering committee includes Verde, the Coalition of Communities of
Color, the Asian Pacific American Network of Oregon, the Portland branch of the
NAACP, the Audubon Society of Portland and the Oregon chapter of the Sierra Club.
The measure has even gotten the attention of CNN political commentator Van Jones.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
Portland Clean Energy Fund Coalition
@PDXCleanEnergy·Follow
Hear why @VanJones68 called #PDXCleanEnergy Initiative
"the most important ballot measure in the country"!
#YESon201
Watch on X
11:42 AM · Sep 14, 2018
24 Reply Copy link
Read 1 reply
What Do They Want?
Supporters say the city's adopted Climate Action Plan needs money behind it if it wants
to meet its goal of powering 100 percent of the community's electricity needs with clean
renewable energy by 2035.
So they're looking at businesses, who they say have an inherent financial responsibility to
support the city's climate goals. Proponents of the measure say businesses are a
significant contributor to carbon emissions in manufacturing, shipping and supply chain
practices.
It's also no coincidence that cultural organizations are supporting the measure;
proponents say climate change has a disproportionate impact on low-income
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
communities and communities of color. Money from the fund will prioritize clean
energy project and job training in those communities.
Who's Against The Measure?
The Portland Business Alliance, which has more than 1,900 members that include well-
known retailers and airlines, is against the measure. Eighty percent of the alliance's
members are small businesses, said Andrew Hoan, president and CEO of the Portland
Business Alliance.
"This is a big tent chamber of commerce," Hoan said.
The South Portland Business Association and the Taxpayers Association of Oregon are
against it, too. Even the progressive-leaning advocacy group Tax Fairness Oregon has
come out against the measure.
Why Are Opponents Against The Measure?
In a position paper on the measure, Tax Fairness Oregon says the proposal
could obstruct future attempts to reform statewide business taxes.
"If the initiative fails, regardless of the reason, opponents will claim that taxing big
business is unpopular and make it even more difficult for the legislature to pass a
statewide tax just like the failure of M97 made the legislature’s task harder," the position
paper states.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
But for the most part, opponents are rallying behind the concept of keeping Portland
affordable, perhaps a jab at elements of the measure that its supporters tout (20 to 25
percent of the clean energy fund will be prioritized to job training for low-income people
of color, for example). They say the tax on businesses will trickle down to everyday
people who live, work and shop in the city of Portland.
"To translate very unequivocally: a gross receipts [tax] is a consumer tax," Hoan said.
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
"It is a regressive tax that will be borne ultimately by the people who truly can least
afford to pay for it."
Will The Tax Really Trickle Down To Consumers?
The City Club of Portland, which voted to endorse the measure, released
a report concluding there's no evidence to support this.
"While the arguments against the PCEF mentioned the potential trickle-down effect of
the surcharge to consumers—thus unfairly distributing the tax—the committee found no
evidence that this would, in fact, occur," the report states.
Hoan with the Portland Business Alliance said a small business may not be a direct
target of the tax, but the goods and services a business may use to run a business — real
estate, advertising and marketing services — could be.
"They'll have to raise the prices of their goods, and if they raise the prices of their goods
they may lose customers," Hoan said. "It's economics 101."
Proponents of the measure say the financial impact will be minimal, but the social
impact will be huge — especially for communities of color.
"We recognize that inequality and the climate crisis are interconnected and that we can
actually create good jobs while taking climate action at the same time," said Khanh
Pham, manager of immigrant organizing at the Asian Pacific American Network of
Oregon.
"There isn’t this false choice businesses want us to create between jobs and the
environment."
OPB Election Coverage 2018
Live Results
Live election results for Oregon, Washington and the national race for control of
STREAMING NOW
Litvhee W Uire.S! . House and Senate.
General
Oregon Governor Candidates Make Final Plea — Aimed At White Suburban
Women
Poll Shows Brown Holds Slight Lead In Oregon Governor's Race
What Phil Knight's Enormous Donations Mean In Oregon Governor's Race
Some Oregon County Ballot Measures Give Sweeping Authority To Sheriffs
Oregon Gubernatorial Candidates
Profiles: Kate Brown | Knute Buehler | Patrick Starnes
On The Issues: Climate Change | Death Penalty | Education | Immigration |
Health Care | Housing | PERS
Oregon Ballot Measures
Measure 102: Constitutional Amendment On Affordable Housing
Measure 103: The Grocery Tax Ban
Measure 104: The Supermajority Tax Requirement
Measure 105: The Sanctuary State Measure
Measure 106: The Abortion Measure
Portland Metro Ballot Measures
Metro Affordable Housing Bond 26-199
Portland Clean Energy Initiative 26-201
Portland City Council Race
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
On The Record: Jo Ann Hardesty | Loretta Smith
Profiles In Leadership: Jo Ann Hardesty | Loretta Smith
Portland City Council Candidates Issues Q&A
Central Oregon
Sanctuary Cities For Gun Rights? Oregon Militias Try New Political Tactic
Democrats Step Up To Challenge For Greg Walden's Seat
The Twists And Turns In The Race To Replace Bend Rep. Knute Buehler
Washington
In Carolyn Long, Jaime Herrera Beutler Faces Her Biggest Challenge Yet
Even In Washington, Gun Control Debates Are Emotional And Intense
A Grieving Grandmother's Quest To Change Washington's Gun Laws
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!
📨
Daily news in your
inbox
example@domain.com Sign up
Sign up today for OPB’s “First Look” – your
daily guide to the most important news
and culture stories from around the
Northwest.
Tags: Science & Environment, Election, Business, Energy, Environment, Local, News, Politics,
Climate Change, Clean Energy
Federal funding for public media has been eliminated.
Take action now and protect OPB's independent
journalism and essential programs for everyone.
Make a Sustaining contribution now

About OPB Manage My Membership
Help Center Sponsorship
Work With Us Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
FCC Public Files
FCC Applications
Terms of Use
Editorial Policy
SMS T&C
Contest Rules
Accessibility
STREAMING NOW
Live Wire!